["be that true , you know ? he have bring she shoe and sock , which be a fortune . uh , they have strip we at that stage . and , uh , so I go to she and ask for confirmation . do he -- have he confirm that that be indeed true ?", "these be the kind of reception room . and there be cement , cement floor . and -- and then afterwards , they ask we to strip , and we be shave . I mean , we head and body be shave . and we be herd through -- past soldier , so now I be , like , 13 or 14 , and I be walk naked past soldier all the time , which -- really be -- after the first day or so , you get use to it .", "and -- and then afterwards , they ask we to strip , and we be shave . I mean , we head and body be shave . and we be herd through -- past soldier , so now I be , like , 13 or 14 , and I be walk naked past soldier all the time , which -- really be -- after the first day or so , you get use to it . but , um -- and then we be herd into a bathhouse with overhead shower . by that time we know that the gas chamber be dress up as shower room .", "Change of tape SUBJECT : we -- we stay together , the group of 200 of we who have be select from the -- from that transport , and we be all young , healthy people . I mean , we have be select once over again when we be in the bath house , we have be select naked . you know , that be true . and again , they want to send my mother off , and they -- and then they ask she whether she have somebody there , and she say she have a daughter .", "SUBJECT : oh , I remember the vacation we use to spend together . we use to go swim in the river . and I remember this younger girl once do somersault when she be naked . -lsb- laugh -rsb- which be not -- you know . it be kind of funny incident .", "and that be -- that be where they be . we save nothing . we come back naked . interviewer 2 : be there any physical problem that you have sustain now as a result of this kind of abuse ? SUBJECT : well , I -- I have a -- I have a slipped disk , which I have operate fairly soon after -- you know , after the war , which be fine now .", "interviewer 2 : back to you as a young girl have to walk past soldier , past man . SUBJECT : yeah . interviewer 2 : completely shave , naked . well , we can not . we have to do the um - but I want the answer .", "and he want to be good to I . and he fix it to I , for I . interviewer : Mr. Schlesinger , I do not understand how you be able to hold onto those glass , have go through the procedure at Auschwitz of be strip and all that . subject 2 : take away everything ? interviewer : yes .", "tell the soldier who be stand outside with a gun on he shoulder . tell he that I examine you . afterwards , all the woman be send out to the field , strip half naked , thousand of they . and the soldier be lift up the breast one by one , all the woman , to search for diamond under they breast . maybe they paste a diamond there .", "and then by such miracle that would take I a while to explain , somebody happen to know we from another city , who happen to vacation in another city . she be -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . see my sister , and she yell over to I , in a place where you see thousand of girl naked , we go to the bathhouse . she call over to I and she say , Eva , I see you sister . and then I know that where my sister be in what camp , I beg the block leader to let I go over there .", "I mean , not internal obviously , but do you have to undergo examination -- subject 2 : yeah , they check before -- as I say , when we go from Auschwitz to Warsaw , they check we again . we have to strip , and then they check we if you have anything on you . interviewer : be you aware that people be be exterminate ? subject 2 : when we be in Auschwitz , I would not believe it be a gas chamber .", "it be very dark , because they be bombing around Auschwitz . and so they keep the camp very , very dark at night . so they reselect we with one little flickering light , of course , undressed , completely naked . and they could not see my body . if they would have see it , I never would have get into the transport .", "and then you would get a rag . you would really just call it a rag . and for some reason , they think that we have to go through this bathhouse so often , many time I would come back from the bathhouse completely naked , absolutely no clothes . because there be so many people arrive at that time when we come that they just simply do not have enough clothes for everybody . so many time , I just come home without anything on I .", "because there be so many people arrive at that time when we come that they just simply do not have enough clothes for everybody . so many time , I just come home without anything on I . one day , as we walk home and go to the front of the camp where the man be , this one prisoner see I -- hungarian by the way -- see I walk naked . and they work with clothes , with clothes in that camp , sort clothes or something . interviewer : you mean you walk around naked ?", "one day , as we walk home and go to the front of the camp where the man be , this one prisoner see I -- hungarian by the way -- see I walk naked . and they work with clothes , with clothes in that camp , sort clothes or something . interviewer : you mean you walk around naked ? subject 1 : yes . interviewer : do many people ?", "and I be maybe do not shove enough , be maybe too weak to rush . so those who do not could not get anything . so I come home completely naked , and this man , he be really wait at the fence for those girl who do not get any clothes . and he throw I a dress . and he say there be a piece of bread in the pocket .", "because they do not have a choice . but some of the people want to be there , you know , and help we poor people go into the chamber . it be call , you know , that they have to undress themself and take a bath . and I want you to know , as many year now , 35 year go by , now , I personally feel it be more difficult now than 35 year ago . the smell of human flesh come back to you nostril .", "he also dare to do and to put on a pair of work pants and the pants be from this material , too . and we go in on a empty u-boat . and he ask I to undress myself . and he give I a work pair of pants up to here . and he bring I in -- in the work place for a shower .", "then , the few picture I have from my family be destroy , right , in this camp , too . everything be take . we have to undress completely . they shave you hair . you could not have anything in you possession , you know .", "there be about 35 block . there be one million woman -- look all alike . no hair , some of they naked -- and my sister-in-law say hello to I . she say I be in block 16 . we arrive three day ago , and I have my three sister with I .", "we know . so there be another dictator come in . but that you suddenly , uh , completely naked and -- and -- and no law in the world will ever protect you against what anybody want to do to you , that you have to experience . and that be -- that be the difference . anti-semite , there always be fight -- we have all the time .", "and they tell they , they do not have time to guess they . on they have a place , the pool , -lsb- INAUDIBLE -rsb- . and they have one guy with a machine gun , and first he tell he , take the clothes , be naked , all the clothes . interviewer 1 : to undress ? SUBJECT : Undress , they have to undress .", "on they have a place , the pool , -lsb- INAUDIBLE -rsb- . and they have one guy with a machine gun , and first he tell he , take the clothes , be naked , all the clothes . interviewer 1 : to undress ? SUBJECT : Undress , they have to undress . and -- and they start kill they .", "and they have one guy with a machine gun , and first he tell he , take the clothes , be naked , all the clothes . interviewer 1 : to undress ? SUBJECT : Undress , they have to undress . and -- and they start kill they . so one be run away , and he get a shot in the back .", "they be dead in 1942 , when they want to Treblinka . and I sort of feel relieved , in a way , that I do not suffer anymore . and when we arrive at the building , we be tell to strip . I remember man sit there . they shave we head -- not mine .", "my head -- not my head -- they shave the head of the other girl , and by some , I do not know , miracle , or a -- I can not explain today -- they -- there be those that get out with with they hair . my head be not shave . we be humiliate be naked in front of these strange man . and what -- I remember , which I find out later on , that this be Mengele . he stand there in front , with other german .", "-lsb- mumble -rsb- he try to escape . he try to escape at Chateau-Thierry but it be signal by the pay inhabitant to signal if anybody try to escape , that they be stop , and all the escapee be recapture . they have to undress and get back -- interviewer : why do not you tell we in you own word ? SUBJECT : these be my word .", "and suddenly , it be signal by the good french people that there be escapee . they stop the train they catch the escapee . they undress they . they leave they -- they have to leave they cloth on the voie , on the -- how do you say ? the railroad .", "so like the father , with the shoe , everything that we can , in the morning , escape . but he do not listen . he undress , and if they knock the door 6 o'clock or 5 o'clock in the morning , he look for he pajamas . so they take he to the concentration camp . I get a letter from he .", "we could not breathe , we could not stand , we could not sit . it be -- I do not know how many people be there , and we -- we arrive to Auschwitz , we do not know what to expect . we -- the first thing they tell we , to undress , and it -- it be a nightmare . interviewer 2 : you mean undress before you come into the camp ? SUBJECT : no , when we come into the camp .", "it be -- I do not know how many people be there , and we -- we arrive to Auschwitz , we do not know what to expect . we -- the first thing they tell we , to undress , and it -- it be a nightmare . interviewer 2 : you mean undress before you come into the camp ? SUBJECT : no , when we come into the camp . interviewer 2 : how be it when you enter the gate ?", "you know , when I go through the selection and they be say , this be Mengel this -- I never look at he . at that time , I be 16 -- over 16 , and the embarrassment be still very big . interviewer 2 : of be naked ? SUBJECT : of be naked , and -- and they would go around the one have develop better the body , or bigger bust . look for stronger people , and this today , maybe , it be a different story , but that time it be -- I can not even tell you that much because I never -- I just remember my aunt be with I -- the one that live with I , and many time we be look for a little red brick to color the cheek to look healthy , so I remember many time she be do this to I , and so these selection be very degrading .", "at that time , I be 16 -- over 16 , and the embarrassment be still very big . interviewer 2 : of be naked ? SUBJECT : of be naked , and -- and they would go around the one have develop better the body , or bigger bust . look for stronger people , and this today , maybe , it be a different story , but that time it be -- I can not even tell you that much because I never -- I just remember my aunt be with I -- the one that live with I , and many time we be look for a little red brick to color the cheek to look healthy , so I remember many time she be do this to I , and so these selection be very degrading . interviewer 2 : and that for you , it be not a matter of living or die , but this degredation , the shame of be there .", "help he . they take we in to shower . and we undress and put we clothing , like we be gon na pick it up after . we get in . we be shave we head , we hair go , everything .", "we be shave we head , we hair go , everything . after a couple of minute in the shower , where you hardly have a drop of water , we you get out . completely naked . no clothes . and we be march out .", "maybe they be gon na let you keep it . but nothing be keep , what we have , everything be take away . because for three day in Auschwitz , we be naked . in three day there be , like , six selection . they ask who be under 18 , they be gon na get white bread .", "and they be enjoy themselves . so it be a Sunday afternoon , they be play soccer . and a little further down , if you look good , you see the naked woman and child wait in line to get into the crematory . and the scream you do not hear because this orchestra be blaze away on the top of they lung on the brass . subject 2 : or you see truckload of kid , you know , they be holler mother , mother .", "they give it back . subject 2 : Orderly . subject 1 : then we be put into a big room where we have to undress . it be a huge shower room . there be hundred of shower from the top .", "you know , they form -- each block be put together , and we have to march around the place . there be a -- you know the tower be there where the guard be arm with machine gun ? and there be a green grass , a strip of grass , between the walk and the barb wire fence . if you step -- you be tell , do not step on that grass . if you step on that grass , they shoot you from up there .", "like when you come here from the plane , they be go out . they inspect you . I have to completely undress . they examine you -- whether you have any german mark , or foreign country money , or anything with you , gold or silver , if you have anything . you could have only 10 german mark when you leave .", "and as long as we work for the Germans , they give we enough food to keep we alive . but we be always hungry . we be always hungry , naked , and barefoot . interviewer : be all you family together with you ? subject 1 : all the family be together .", "she be sick , she do not have enough food , because we do not have any food in the ghetto . and they try to take she away from I . and at that time , I do not know what get into I , but I just speak out at this soldier -- all naked like it be , you know , with no clothes -- and I say , do not take away my sister . you take away already my -- because everybody else be take away at that time from I , my mother , the rest of my family . do not take away she too .", "they beat we , we be work , shoe shop , carpenting , everything for they just , for free . so , and a little while later , come the order , all of you -- all the people , jewish people , they get to concentrate you in one place , in a field , they get to bring in everything what they get -- diamond , gold , money , everything to bring it . and they put in a park , and everybody be get to take off everything , naked . and they make you , a bar , to jump three , four foot high . and somebody could not jump it , they beat they up , and they fall down , and they die .", "we come in -- you know , have to take the clothes off , and there be like , a shower . and they give we -- we have to take everything off . just -- just undress . it be cold . no brassiere .", "and all the work be do by other prisoner . see , the guard would standby , but all the dirty work be do by fellow prisoner . we be naked , we take a shower . we be naked , run through cold rain that night to a tent . and then I do get my -- my number tattoo , which be 117022 .", "see , the guard would standby , but all the dirty work be do by fellow prisoner . we be naked , we take a shower . we be naked , run through cold rain that night to a tent . and then I do get my -- my number tattoo , which be 117022 . this be suppose to be my name .", "what do he do ? while the train be move , we would throw the dead body overboard . but before we do that , we would strip they of all they clothes because we need the clothes for we own protection . after five day , uh , 2/3 of the prisoner be dead . we arrive in Buchenwald and there it start up again .", "he be shoot in the neck -- in the neck . they think , you know , he be dead , and the bullet come out here , not in side . and bleeding , he run overnight in December naked , complete to the jewish hospital . and he -- he hide in there , you know , in the morgue for two week until the Russian come . interviewer : so you do not leave because the boss --", "I sleep on -- on -- cadaver . I do not know that . and I be complete naked . complete naked , you know , they put I in -- I have to wait -- I have to wait , you know , if such a bed be empty . there be four people .", "I do not know that . and I be complete naked . complete naked , you know , they put I in -- I have to wait -- I have to wait , you know , if such a bed be empty . there be four people . until then , we have sit on this the floor .", "from the bed , throw they down . then they put they in together , put they on -- on a piece of wood , and they carry they out . and there be , you know , people -- we have be naked . and everybody , you know , be go in and they keep we . ok .", "and , uh , you end up in a -- in a area where , at this point , all we belongings be leave on the train . we have nothing except what we be wear and what we carry . we end up in a delousing area where they tell you to undress completely , keep you shoe . they shave you , they disinfect you shoe , and they tell you to take a shower . and we take a shower .", "we know that . and we also know that the people who be too thin be go to be weed out , people who could not possibly work . and we be tell to undress . and , uh , we be line up in line . and each line have they pick .", "well , my brother-in-law be a big man , and he put she in that -lsb- inaudible -rsb- bag . it be winter , about January or February . she be naked in order to put she in there , in the bag . and on the way out , they have craftsman choose to work for certain branch of the german government for they . like furrier , tailor , carpenter , and so forth .", "now , here we be , the Russ -- the Germans be go . everybody be go to the ammunition depot get a gun and whatever you can grab -- a bread , a shirt , a pair of pants , anything to wear . we be almost naked , just a piece of rag . and I be physically break because one of the Germans break my rib . and as a matter of fact , I be to Germany two year ago to the trial of that guy .", "then come that guy along , and he start just hit I with he boot here and there until I be just ready to collapse . and of course , come out of that , you could not report you be sick because if you be sick , they put you in the oven . so I just put around on my rib strip of rag , whatever I could , in order to breathe . in the end of that trial , I ask the judge for permission to talk to he , to that german . and I say , look , you probably do not forget all this , what you do .", "we have to change the clothes , the shoe , everything . and we stand -- this be in January . January , February in snow , out clothes , out shoe , bare naked . we be about two week over there . and they take we to a -- this be near Weimar .", "interviewer 1 : can you describe they ? SUBJECT : yes , I suppose it be sort of lonely railway station and truck arrive at the station . a lot of guard , a lot of shout , police dog , people be separate , old people and young child be strip and take straight to gas chamber . and other people be use for labor , so that be the sort of image I have in my mind of it . I do not think that be a image that I have ever get from the family , of course .", "there be three day in Auschwitz be -- I do not know how to describe you . it be impossible ! you see people walk around -- walk around , people naked , walk around people crazy . some people run over the gate and they get electrocute . it be unbelievable , unbelievable !", "and first they shave off the hair . they take all the clothes off . men do it , but all of they of we naked . and then check the ear or ring or everything . and they pull out a tooth , they rip off the earring if they do not come out easy .", "they take everything . subject 1 : you can not hide anything because -- subject 2 : you be naked . how can you hide something ? subject 1 : you could not hide anything .", "how can you hide something ? subject 1 : you could not hide anything . interviewer : man be do this to -- and woman be there naked ? subject 1 : yeah , all of they . how many man you see run around naked and woman naked till they give you something to cover .", "interviewer : man be do this to -- and woman be there naked ? subject 1 : yeah , all of they . how many man you see run around naked and woman naked till they give you something to cover . subject 2 : when I -- when I come to Auschwitz and I see the woman , you know , I pass through the camp , from the woman camp . they be all separate .", "they be all separate . I be look at the people . they be run around naked . they be all naked . and I be talk to somebody .", "I be look at the people . they be run around naked . they be all naked . and I be talk to somebody . he say , what do you talk about ?", "it be , you know , with wire , the electric wire , you know . what be they do ? that woman naked . and he say what be you talk about ? they be crazy , the woman .", "and I look and I say oh . I close mine eye . look at that woman without anything naked . so many people . there be no shame at all .", "-- the thing . we do see only the woman . we do not see the I , because the man -- the woman , they walk around naked . near the electric wire . subject 1 : yeah , but some of they do not want to live .", "all the Hungarians be take uh to the -- to the sea . and they break the ice , and they be kill they there . they undress they naked . and they shoot they cold-bloodedly . because the Jews be bad , and we want to get rid of they .", "they say , why ? there be a lady in back of I . she say , be you get undress ? she take a whip , and she whip with I . I get undressed .", "I throw myself down , I put my head in -- underneath to save my head in order to stay alive . so to I it make a lot of sense . I still -- still even now , I dream I be go to be take -- and I have be take -lsb- inaudible -rsb- oh my God I have to go through again , strip -- they be go to strip I . they be go to probably now push I on the line . I be go to be -- I be not go to be able to survive .", "and ironic thing happen to I . we arrive to Auschwitz . out of the wagon now in Auschwitz , we already be strip and put in the -- in the stripe uniform . wait by the train and we do not know what be go on . one -- somebody tell that we be go to be put in the train and train go to go right in the as chamber .", "they take we name from what we come in , how old we be -- next , I find myself -- other in the street . I see big door everywhere . and they tell we strip down . take everything off -- nude . take it off .", "take it off . and then minute , they take everything away there too . I be stand there naked with everybody standing naked . now I figure I be go to the gas definitely . there be no doubt about it .", "and how they cry , those people , I figure , it be -- it be -- it be come to I now . when I get that uniform in my hand , they do not give I a chance even to put it on I . naked -- hold in my hand . they throw I onto another truck -- bunch of people on truck , and they be take we already . I find myself on railroad station again .", "and in the middle of the train , they have water , drinking water . and under for a first time , since I have be transport so many time -- they have this hay that you could lay down in it , you know -- that you feel a little bit more comfortable . you be not on there naked wood . so we be all in now in the wagon after that thing that happen with that -- the russian fellow . and we be stand , and we be talk to each other , what be go to -- what be the next thing go to happen ?", "MARIANNE : Joseph C Harsch . WILSON : Joseph C Harsch , very famous correspondent be on the same plane . and he tell we of be there the day the american troops liberate Dachau and go in and see these pile of naked body outside around the building . and that be -- that be -- at least the gassing be a fairly merciful death for the people in Dachau . the -- the scientific atrocity , I think , be more at Auschwitz and some of the other concentration camp .", "and how they get -- I do not imagine -- they do not feed they much . they do not -- there be no get in of -- of nutritional or -- or clothes to they . they be strip of what they have and starve till they turn come to go down in the gas chamber . so . interviewer : do you hear that there be smell , scream ?", "when we be hide , there be no cigarette . but a man grow tobacco leaf . we be strip the leaf of the tobacco . so what he give to my father be the stem , the bare stem . my father chop it up and smoke that .", "I -- well , uh , you know , you and I have see picture of Auschwitz that be take . but whatever it be , it be not really real to we . and then , as if it be not bad enough , we could see through we sight , or just by naked vision , the burning of people and everything . we drive down alongside Mannheim after it be all over . and I see chunk of meat -- human being , body , various part , strew all over the place , and , uh , bit and piece of uniform , but not very much uniform , just human flesh .", "I really do not care . and he do go . we give he as little money as we have because the Germans when they come in , little by little , they strip we of everything . like , you know , as they go , they take away we home and everything . we still smuggle through little jewelry and thing , you know , or a fur coat .", "we do not have any clothes . we be barefoot -- just some piece of rag . they strip you . they x-ray you . they take everything away from you .", "it be a village . you have farmer there and there be food galore , but we be on the front . and one morning my girlfriend be stand naked and wash and something hit the roof . and the house be on fire , and we jump out from the second floor . we do not even break a leg .", "in Auschwitz you be sell to the highest buyer . there be people that come , manufacturer , they have work defense . they come , they look you over , you have to strip completely naked , he look you over with a doctor . you know the famous Dr. Mengele . and if you be in good health , you be send to work camp .", "they take we to the left , and we be safe from that fire . we come into a big , big hole . they tell we to -- to disrobe , to undress . interviewer 2 : there be you father , you , and -- SUBJECT : oh no , it be my father ?", "I would not even throw it on the pile . I fold it over as if I would -- as I do it now . and we undress completely . I have a silk scarf . and I have a little pocket knife , rust-free .", "interviewer : what do you see ? SUBJECT : hundred and thousand of people . it be hard to I to begin because it be -- they strip we of we belongings . they cut my hair . they shave my head .", "SUBJECT : Entlausung . that mean this be the , um , the shower room where you come . you know , you undress , and you leave you clothes there . and so supposedly they give you a shower . I can not go into all the detail that you want to do .", "we go to a different barracks , and they go to the different barracks . but the day we arrive in Auschwitz , the ss people come in , the soldier . and we be stark naked . we be wait to have we head shave . and he recognize that opera singer .", "she be a jewish woman . and he get very hysterical , a smirk on he face . and he make that woman , a middle-aged woman , get up , stark naked , and sing . anyway , be in the hospital , sick with malaria , I run into that particular woman , doctor . and she recognize I .", "that mean delouse we . and hundred of thousand of woman -- it be a hot day . we be stand in the sun , stark naked , for hour . we never get to the -- we have never see water . we have never see the bath .", "and here be a restaurant in that station where you could buy big white bread for -- for a couple mark , for penny , for nothing . and right away , you could recognize the Jews . they be dress in sack , you know , almost naked -- and this be winter -- look in the garbage can for food . so I go out . I be afraid , you know , there be ever be a sergeant there , you know , and I be a jew .", "then everything for nothing . and at the same time , you would look 10 yard on there . people wrap in a sack , naked . interviewer : starve . SUBJECT : pick up from the -- from the floor .", "open . and they tell we the story -- whoever have a diamond , a ring of gold , of jewelry , everything , have to put it in over here . and they undress one man of naked . and that be go to be happy -- the guy stay with the thing over there , and that be go to be happen . so what ?", "I never see it in my life one . and then gradually you learn that they be head lice , and they be skin lice , and they be gray lice , and they be black , black lice . in fact , on one occasion we be so full of lice the hungarian Army come down with a , this infection unit , where they take all we clothing -- all of it , we have to stand naked -- and they put it in like a pressurized steam sink where they figure they be go to kill they . but the sink do not work right , and do not produce enough heat . and what happen that all the egg that be lay by these lice , they hatch .", "so we be go in the village . we be so hungry . we be naked -- almost naked , and barefoot . we do not have anything . so we come in the village and we beg for food , to put on something on we .", "and , uh , we house , from we house be so far away , we be go ? and so they leave we . they be go away and leave we stay on the field , on the naked field , you know . and we be cry . I be the oldest .", "interviewer : you be -- SUBJECT : when they say , right , they -- to Auschwitz . interviewer : you be naked in front of these -- SUBJECT : yeah , sure . it be five -- such big german soldier .", "but I believe the orchestra be in the back , and you have a pool of water in the front . and you have , like , a -- like a line -- what do you call it ? a narrow strip of concrete . and when -- when they would punish you , you would jump , right ? and if you could not , they would push you over into the water .", "but I believe the orchestra be in the back , and you have a pool of water in the front . and you be like a -- like a line where -- what do you call it ? another strip of concrete . and when you -- when they would punish you , you would jump , right ? and if you could not , they push you over the water .", "SUBJECT : and then they take he -- then they take my -- and I hear when they get there -- when they get there , they separate they , just the mother-in-law . they take off the clothes . she be naked , you know , the old one . and -- and my sister be tell I , my older sister , she say to I , when my sister go , then Mengele see my sister . interviewer 1 : that be where already ?", "SUBJECT : -- and come to visit . and I , from -- when this -- when the group mar -- uh , march out to work , they take I in to the guard house , on the right-hand side be a room where the guard use to stay at post . and they tell I , undress myself completely . they lay I down on a -- on a table . and the ss officer say in German , Fuenf und zwanzig , -lsb- German -rsb- and they lay I down .", "the rest of we who be leave behind wait not more than a week or 10 day until Patton 's main army do crash through . and for this time -- this time , it be for real . and , um , I be take back in due course to a , uh , french camp , to a american camp in France , a field hospital , where they strip we clothing off of we -- it be cake on by then after four month without a change -- shave we head because we be full of lice , give we a shower , and , uh , uh , put we in bed . and eventually , I , uh , go to a larger hospital , further in the rear , uh , in the Vosges mountain in a little resort town , what have once be a gambling casino and hotel , for further , uh , recovery . and there , I meet , uh , Captain David H. Clement , a young doctor who be specialize in that time in , uh , malnutrition case , go on later to some of the stalag to help and to study the people who have be there , particularly the jewish population , for so many year , but at this time , uh , be work on ex-pow such as myself .", "interviewer : they take all you clothes . SUBJECT : all the clothes , everything . and we be stand there naked . and all those little german boy . they be laugh at we .", "interviewer 2 : do you remember the name of any of these people ? subject 2 : no . oh , I know my first encounter be -- this be the first day we be stand naked in row . and my mother do not stand straight enough . so one of these kapo come over and hit she in the head .", "and she look at one , and she find one for herself . but they take it away , the glass from everybody . subject 2 : everybody -- we come out from the building just naked , even without we hair . and we give these striped dress , and sometimes wooden shoe , sometime shoe that be select from the wagon , from previous prisoner . many time we do not have a pair .", "we can not edit this story without -- Change of tape subject 2 : everybody -- we come out from the building just naked , even without we hair . and we give these striped dress , and sometimes wooden shoe , sometime shoe that be select from the wagon , from previous prisoner . many time we do not have a pair .", "interviewer 2 : both of you ? subject 1 : we be send to Hamburg , which be bombard day and night . and we , all these young woman , practically naked , wintertime , in the snow , we be build home for those who be bomb out , from the very foundation to the roof , with one german supervisor . both of we digging the foundation , carry the big cement block . sometimes they take we to these bomb on oil factory in the harbor in Hamburg .", "as we be march down in Hamburg , we encounter a group of french prisoner who be they prisoner of war . but they be still get package through the Red Cross . but when they see we half naked , starve , woman , they start to take off they jacket , they scarf , they sweater , and start to throw it to we . so in a day or two , we start to like half like prisoner and half -- I mean french prisoner because we have they jacket and they hat . later , they make a underground passage because the building in which we be house be halfway under water .", "this be the only thing he respect . after that he start to be after I . and he order that Sunday morning we will all have to walk naked in front of he . he want to show I that he be above I and I will be force to walk naked in front of he . but I find out that if you have a toothache -- you see , they need we work .", "after that he start to be after I . and he order that Sunday morning we will all have to walk naked in front of he . he want to show I that he be above I and I will be force to walk naked in front of he . but I find out that if you have a toothache -- you see , they need we work . we be laborer .", "if you have a toothache , you could have you tooth pull , but not fix , just pull . and I have one tooth tool that need a little filling . but I say , I be go to have it rather pull than walk naked in front of he . and it be a prisoner woman who make the list who be go . and I tell she what be the story .", "and say good bye for my mother and for everybody in this letter . and I have the letter with I until I go to Buchenwald . in Buchenwald , I have to undress myself , and they take everything away . the letter leave , go . interviewer 1 : do they shave you head too ?", "and a lot , you know , go nut , you know , scream , yell , run , and a few left over healthy one . and we come to Buchenwald , be there a bath . they tell you strip , right . they cut you hair off all over . and you have to go through disinfection like that , right ?", "they cut you hair off all over . and you have to go through disinfection like that , right ? we be all naked in January -- in Feb -- January be it , right ? yeah . all naked all over , freezing temperature , all outside .", "we be all naked in January -- in Feb -- January be it , right ? yeah . all naked all over , freezing temperature , all outside . as a matter of fact , you know what happen down there to I ? some transport come from Auschwitz .", "she be afraid . she know if she ask it will be dangerous . so she kind of sneak around barefoot , naked , hungry , frozen , swollen . one day the person be feed the cow , and he have huge basket that they use to have on they shoulder -- they be huge , about a yard in diameter -- with hay they use to carry to the cow in the field . he spot she lie there freeze .", "how I -- where I be or how I survive , I do not know . and I walk downstairs . and I see those thousand and thousand , naked body lay all over , one on top of the other like big mountain because the prisoner who become a little bit back of they strength , they be able to take those dead body and throw they down , either through the window because they could not carry they , or there be a place , you know . it be , like , when you walk down the step , you have those handle that you hold on to it . there be empty space in between it .", "so the Jews go to run away . not everybody be go to just go like this . so they strip . and they take away the clothes from they , and then they kill he . those be --", "subject 2 : and this -- this -- subject 1 : all the time . subject 2 : we go into the temple , and then we be strip -- subject 1 : strip by the hungarian , you know , woman . we be -- they take you into a -- a separate room , the woman and the man .", "subject 1 : all the time . subject 2 : we go into the temple , and then we be strip -- subject 1 : strip by the hungarian , you know , woman . we be -- they take you into a -- a separate room , the woman and the man . that be in we own synagogue .", "we be -- they take you into a -- a separate room , the woman and the man . that be in we own synagogue . and that be where they strip you . they take everything valuable away that they find . we be child , and we have golden earring .", "so we would have leave the camp , we have it , in case they will take it away from we . so whatever we be have on ourselves , we will have it . and it be hot , and she undress . and she take off a couple of dress . she be leave just with one dress on she back .", "subject 1 : so they count we . subject 2 : five , everybody have to stay , five in the line . they tell you to strip out everything , only thing you hold be the shoe . and the line be go , and go , and go , and you do not know where you go . I mean , each time it be kind of more people .", "so you look for a scarf to put on you hair . and I remember I have in the shoe . when they say undress , and I take out a couple cigarette and stick they in my shoe . and my sister -- and there come a ss , somebody come in to see what I be do , push I . and I push back .", "but then the winter come . and it be a really already very , very cold . so they use to line we up , strip naked , and on a Sunday morning , where the village people -- because it be like on the outskirts , you know , like a small village , you know , mountain . I do not know where it be . and the people be go to church , all dress up .", "we use to see they , all these people go to church on Sunday morning . and we be hundred , per hundred . they take we all naked strip , march down the road to the river when it be freezing cold already to dip in the cold water , and come out , and march back into the camp , and to put the blanket on . and that be how we stay . so , and people could not take that , so they be die .", "they do not have bus or truck at that , at that place . you have to work -- march for about a hour or two until you get to the work place . interviewer 1 : when you be walk naked through the street to plunge in the river , in the cold , and the people be go to church , be you aware of anybody react to you , any of the village -- subject 1 : we look at they , and they look at we . and there be never any eye or contact , or say one word between we .", "and they be , I guess , go about they business . and on a Sunday morning , they be all dress up . interviewer 1 : the child do not stare at 100-odd naked woman ? subject 1 : they just look at we , and pass we like they be expect it or they new about it . it do not mean any difference to we .", "they do not hear we , because we be not close . they be on one side , and we be on the other side of the road . interviewer 1 : you be completely naked ? subject 1 : completely naked . there be nothing on we .", "they be on one side , and we be on the other side of the road . interviewer 1 : you be completely naked ? subject 1 : completely naked . there be nothing on we . interviewer 2 : you shoe ?", "or , or you know , devil ? I mean , he , he , you know , the way we look all skin and bone . naked and all . and I remember he throw a bread . and I grab it back to my stomach .", "interviewer : do you have glove ? SUBJECT : glove sometime . and when I be in Dachau later , we use to stay in glove for hour outside in the morning , striped clothes and the clothes be strip like this , the striped clothes with the number here . in the morning , when we come back from work for hour . interviewer : and it be cold ?", "SUBJECT : Auschwitz . so from that row , we go into a bed house and they tell we to get undressed . you could imagine at the age of that time and be so innocent and someone tell you to get undressed naked . Strip everything . I say to my sister , I will not .", "so from that row , we go into a bed house and they tell we to get undressed . you could imagine at the age of that time and be so innocent and someone tell you to get undressed naked . Strip everything . I say to my sister , I will not . she say , you have no choice .", "she even have a lot more beautiful hair than I have , but -- thicker hair -- but we both have long hair . throw you panties in one pile , you sock , whatever you have . and I look at she and I turn back , and I be stand there naked . and I think that the whole world have undress . I have never see so much clothes in my life .", "throw you panties in one pile , you sock , whatever you have . and I look at she and I turn back , and I be stand there naked . and I think that the whole world have undress . I have never see so much clothes in my life . mountain and mountain of clothing , and the people disappear .", "and there be no room . we be just sit on the floor , you know , very , very close . naked , bald , frightened . and you be not allow to say a word . the , the , uh , german policewoman , the german ss , the aufseherin then they call she , they be walk up and down with a whip in they hand .", "but we do not know , really , that -- whether they be alive or not , or whether they be take to another transport . interviewer : the money . you say people be search , strip , look in they seam . and yet there be people who have money to barter with food . how do that happen ?", "but that be -- that be -- you know , everybody know . well , so they have -- they have to -- they have to -- they have to find out who be able-bodied and who be not able-bodied . so at the beginning of spring ' 44 , they make we all strip naked , woman , child , and man . and then we stand in a long , long row , and Mr. Eichmann , a cursed memory and two other Germans put a table there . and well , we have to step in front of they , and they ask we , who be you , and what -- what be you profession ?", "so I feel at this point that I would rather prefer be gas than club . so I step forward . I be strip of my shoe . I be strip of my outer clothing . and I be put on the truck together with another group of man .", "so I step forward . I be strip of my shoe . I be strip of my outer clothing . and I be put on the truck together with another group of man . now something happen , which be one of the reason that I be here .", "subject 2 : about three hour , you know , on the truck . so man go different place , and woman go different place . and so we -- you know , they tell we to undress , you know , naked . and whoever be young and able to work , so they send we to place , you know , demolition place . I be there three week .", "as a matter of fact , my cousin 's husband -- I have a cousin . and he be send to Treblinka . and then , they make the people undress . and he jump in in a wagon with the clothes . and he come back to the Warsaw ghetto .", "interviewer 2 : Powder . SUBJECT : the powder into the grenade . so they be every day search from head to toe naked . and um , when they be go into work and when they leave work . but they be able to smuggle out some of the pulver .", "so then , they -- there be a nurse there . and they make I go to the nurse . and I have to undress and be examine . they think I might carry weapon and all sort of thing . I do not know .", "this must have be early ' 42 , I think . and he be tell we how he participate with a group of polish worker in a town -- neighboring town where they dig a grave , a large pit . and they witness a execution of jewish people , approximately 900 people all line up in three line -- man , woman , and child -- and be tell to undress , and then they be machine gun . and he proceed to explain to I , but he be sort of relish the way he be explain this to I , as though he be enjoy this act that , when they be cover the pit with the earth , there be some people who be still alive . that have a devastating effect on I .", "it do not . but anyway , then , the next situation , they bring we in on this large reveille place . and they tell we all to undress , leave all we belongings , which consist of just what we wear , and perhaps a few photograph . we have to leave everything . then , they usher we into a large shower room , and they let go of some ice water .", "then , we go out through a different door into what they call a quarantine , which have four barracks . and that be a camp within a camp . in that quarantine , we walk around naked , day and night -- just again , four day and four night . and during that time , they shave we of all hair . and this be a extremely painful experience , when man use rusty razor blade and nick you , and then they use Lysol on the cut .", "I never even think of that . in , on that refinery , we all be , wear we regular clothes , such as they be . the first thing that happen in Plaszow , we be , uh , we be , we have to strip . we go to the so-called , uh , shower and Entlausung , and , uh , uh , which mean , uh , uh , disinfection procedure . and we be give uniform , which be the usual stripe , I think linen pants , and , and a top , and the cap , and wooden shoe .", "it be a penis , that be what it be . and , uh , I do not know why . apparently , because of all of the naked body that be there . so this be what they call they . it be the most horrible sight that I have ever see , the bulldozer work , digging up , sift up .", "subject 2 : I remember stand in line there . we be stand in line , I think for the shower at that time . we be completely naked . and , uh , I see , like , maybe a block away , I see the people be -- I -- I -- I know , as a child , I know it be body . I have no idea --", "subject 2 : I remember stand in line , there . we be stand in line , I think , for the shower , that time . we be completely naked . and , uh , I see , like , maybe a block away , I see people that I -- I know as a child , I know it be body . I have no idea --", "and I remember the next for I terrible thing be that when we come there , there be all kind of epidemic go on . and they shave not we hair , but the rest of the hair on we body . and we be lie there naked , sort of expose . and suddenly , these ss man come to the room . and sort of they be walk around and -- and look at we .", "and sort of they be walk around and -- and look at we . and I remember think that this be the most terrible moment , much worse -- I feel totally dehumanize . I hate they so much that they should -- they should see I naked . it be somehow terrible . and so I decide that -- that I do not want to live .", "I remember this story too , when this -lsb- ? -lsb- non-english -rsb- ? -rsb- ask we colony to undress . and he go -- this be -- it be the -- if we have the shower , and he be we -- I be , um , ask , um , where , before the shower , there be , uh , a room , a -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . anyways , the child start to cry .", "I call they all child . they be cry . and it be -- when he say undress , it be undress or a bullet . I remember I say to the girl , girl , why you be cry ? be you ever ashamed to undress they in front of a dog ?", "and it be -- when he say undress , it be undress or a bullet . I remember I say to the girl , girl , why you be cry ? be you ever ashamed to undress they in front of a dog ? I go the first one , undressed myself , and go in . and he say , how old be you ?", "to report to the -- to the temp -- to the -- to the -- I do not know where they -- to Auschwitz , because we be a branch from Auschwitz . it be where they take the number , and we be a branch from Auschwitz . interviewer 1 : when they ask the young girl to undress -- SUBJECT. : yeah . interviewer 1 : -- what happen after they undress ?", "interviewer 1 : when they ask the young girl to undress -- SUBJECT. : yeah . interviewer 1 : -- what happen after they undress ? SUBJECT. : I -- I -- I go -- I undress myself , and I come and put back in the -lsb- ? cupboard .", "SUBJECT. : yeah . interviewer 1 : -- what happen after they undress ? SUBJECT. : I -- I -- I go -- I undress myself , and I come and put back in the -lsb- ? cupboard . ? -rsb-", "and I go away . I do not -- interviewer 1 : why do they want you to undress ? SUBJECT. : I do not know why . I do not ask question , and I do not ask the girl later .", "SUBJECT. : I do not know why . I do not ask question , and I do not ask the girl later . interviewer 1 : who be watch you get undress ? SUBJECT. : he be only -- the only one that ever do . interviewer 1 : just one person be --", "some of they be , uh , not . we be wear this , uh , they give we the -- I do not remember what everybody get a chance to put on . I -- I be not naked , no . I remember I be dress when I be kneel . I be --", "she do not say anything . and I never see she again . they take we to a bed where they shave we and strip we of we clothes . everybody get they . interviewer : do you remember what -- any fear you have at that time ?", "I just do not feel anything . they push I into a bed . they strip I . they shave my head . they take -- strip I off my clothes .", "they strip I . they shave my head . they take -- strip I off my clothes . they just give I a little rag . I get just a little blouse that cover my front .", "I get just a little blouse that cover my front . the back be rip . the rest be naked . and I be just push like a , in that trance . I do not care .", "but it be -- there be tree . in the beginning , we have very small ration to eat , about 600 or 800 calorie per person . after the hunger become a little bit -- get a little bit worse , people with strip the tree from the leaf and eat the leaf . and whenever a stray animal come in , it be also strip . the hospital have a little bit better food , because people would die every day , 10 or 15 , of typhus , and they be take away , together these people alive .", "in the beginning , we have very small ration to eat , about 600 or 800 calorie per person . after the hunger become a little bit -- get a little bit worse , people with strip the tree from the leaf and eat the leaf . and whenever a stray animal come in , it be also strip . the hospital have a little bit better food , because people would die every day , 10 or 15 , of typhus , and they be take away , together these people alive . and one day , they take all the remain people , include my parent , to a train , and nobody come back .", "interviewer : be you suppress it now ? SUBJECT : yeah . it be the first time that I speak today , and I feel like I be naked , that I be tell thing that I should not -- that should be bury in I . I know it be my own -- maybe I should have a duty to tell it . but it be very difficult to speak about it .", "you can imagine there be -- -lsb- sigh -rsb- -- there maybe -- here be the shelving . see this -- this -- this wide -- wide strip . and here , there be the ground where -- where the -- the mud from the channel be put . and we have only a small a small --", "I feel that I belong there because my -- my -- my relative , my mother , my everybody be there . but a ss man with a -- with a cane grab I by my throat and push I to the group where I be count 499 and I have the 500th . now we be march one and a half mile or two mile to a place , a huge building , where we have to undress totally naked . everything what belong to we do not belong anymore to we . and they be scream and beat and torture , lo , lo , lo , lo .", "we be surround by ss woman and ss man . now come the torture . when I find myself without hair , naked , and look around with the 500 people who I do not recognize they at all , ss woman tell we -- among we -- we should get up on the table because we must have some that hide diamond . now , they put we on a table and they want to examine we like a gynecologist if we do hide diamond somewhere . I plead with she , I never have be marry .", "now we be arrive to Auschwitz . c3 be the block . for what reason or what be it -- I do not know what kind of punishment must have be in that camp , they put we -- the three -- the 500 girl naked with that one dress , a rainy day . and schotter what be schotter ? Pebbles .", "and the Wehrmacht find we there , 300 girl -- this be 300 commando young , everybody be healthy young . before they select to the 300 commando . we be naked and expose for the full day . they overlook we . we should not have a pimple nowhere .", "and he say to these two guy , all right , bring he into the bathroom , to the toilet . and they be drag I into the toilet barrack , which be a barrack , have a brick floor . and he say , ok , strip he clothes off . they take my clothes off . he say , lay he down .", "and it be lock , and you be a human being . you have to do human thing . so right there they put a pail , just to strip we of we dignity . this be also they way , they scheme . you have no choice .", "and then we know , but it be too late . we have no choice , even if we have know sooner , because the ghetto be dismantle . subject 2 : will you please tell also about the naked -- what happen to the young woman . subject 1 : oh well , I be go to . I be come to that .", "even that they would not let you keep . nothing . naked , strip naked , they take we to a different place . the other people from Auschwitz think that they would take we to the crematorium , but they get word that they need people to work . they have to send new people , new replacement , to the russian front .", "it be another concentration camp . at ravensbruk do we , a very good thing to we , too . any way , this doctor , a german doctor , be sit like that , and 500 woman have to parade all naked . now , I could not kill a fly . if I see a fly , I would chase it away .", "we do think . we be numb , we be numb . but at that time , 500 woman -- just he be sit and smile and have a good time see 500 woman parade naked in front of he . we learn later -- I do not know whether it be true , because I personally do not see it -- that he select a few to be he mistress . for he own .", "and on the other hand , we get the clothes , and we go back . because we -- interviewer 2 : you be naked . SUBJECT : naked . we could not wait , because always , you have to run .", "because we -- interviewer 2 : you be naked . SUBJECT : naked . we could not wait , because always , you have to run . so we go back to the barrack .", "SUBJECT : from -- yes . till here , maybe . interviewer 2 : and you be naked ? SUBJECT : naked , yes . interviewer 2 : the rest ?", "till here , maybe . interviewer 2 : and you be naked ? SUBJECT : naked , yes . interviewer 2 : the rest ? SUBJECT : yes .", "they have be leave people in bunker . and they find they and they shoot they . and people have to undress they and , you know , to -- to not -- to put they on a fire , because every day they have be burn the body they find . interviewer : and you be do this work ? SUBJECT : no , I be not do this work .", "they have be -- my father be take before , and my mother be take to a camp szebnie , which be with my brother . and the -- I know later on that they have be -- my brother be take a week before my mother to Auschwitz , and later , my mother . and I know sure it be she be kill in Auschwitz , because my cousin , my first cousin who escape , who she be here in Israel , she recognize she when she be naked already , go to the crematorium . she see she . and my mother recognize she .", "but she recognize my mother . I know . interviewer : you mother be naked , you say ? SUBJECT : yes . my mother be not even 40 when she be kill .", "my hus -- yes . she be bring in Auschwitz . she be bring naked to crematorium . my first cousin , she be about two year older than I be . she recognize .", "and be the lagerfuhrer , we miller be there and von Hase I think . and the order be already give then we have be shotten . they ask we to undress ourselves . I remember a little girl of a lady who have name be Grossmann , maybe three or three year old girl , blonde girl . she mother tell she , run away , run away .", "SUBJECT : they have be stand around . and I remember it , because it be so shocking , you know . she be kill , just now kill , and she be naked . she be a really -- a real beauty . very tall , very blonde .", "SUBJECT : the season ? that be in fall . I come out and the next strip be the police department . I just walk through straight . walk out from the ghetto .", "and I think , thanks to that , I be alive today . interviewer : what do you see when you see the gas -- do you smell the gas chamber ? SUBJECT : I see a lot of people naked in Auschwitz -- Women , naked , standing . but I be still on the train . we come by train , a full transport .", "we take the hot shower , and the German say , do you see the building up there ? go around to that building , pick up a towel and clothes . that be winter time , cold , naked . we be run to the next building to pick up a towel and what kind of clothes you could imagine . people be die from pneumonia , sickness .", "but those who do not show , they be take into the camp . but when they start to show , they put he in a special block . interviewer : they strip you and they shave you . and so the fact that you be wear six or three dress do not matter anymore . do not they guess you age ?", "but there be many thing that people write , and keep it on he body , and they just disappear . interviewer : how do you manage to keep this poem ? or you do not when you go to Auschwitz , do not they strip you of everything ? subject 1 : they strip I of everything . well , that be not Auschwitz .", "interviewer : how do you manage to keep this poem ? or you do not when you go to Auschwitz , do not they strip you of everything ? subject 1 : they strip I of everything . well , that be not Auschwitz . that be another .", "subject 2 : Waving , wave with the beret , wave . you can see it here well , the wave . I have the little strip of film , which show how they -- my brother wave he beret during the liberation . interviewer : and you see the film ? where ?", "it be no roof , be open , in the boxcar , open . so we -- we -- we think maybe we will -- we have those tin cup . so we take off we shirt , we make long stripe -- strip and we tie up the thing . we think we would -- while the train be move , maybe we will scoop up a little snow . the snow be still on the ground that time .", "so knowledge of the killing be widespread . knowledge of the final solution be confine to a relatively small group of people who have insight into the oppression of the nazi government . interviewer 2 : I guess what I be really ask you be that people who have live in a town for 700 year be suddenly deport , take away , uh , and the neighbor stand by and watch woman walk down the street naked , totally naked , uh , weigh 90 , 80 , 70 pound , while neighbor go to church . no one do anything . no one say anything .", "if you do not see they all together , you do not know if they be still the same people . so once you see one or two friend come out , they say , oh , well , this be not a crematorium . and so we confidently go to that place , and , uh , the Germans look on while we undress , laugh , smile benevolently , not brutally . that would have be give away where you be go . and they would have have a tough time .", "it be the next day . the train come . and also we have to strip all the time , you know ? we have to strip . this be why I do not understand why people want to walk around naked -- all these people in the '60 .", "the train come . and also we have to strip all the time , you know ? we have to strip . this be why I do not understand why people want to walk around naked -- all these people in the '60 . for I , to be dress means to be protect .", "and also we have to strip all the time , you know ? we have to strip . this be why I do not understand why people want to walk around naked -- all these people in the '60 . for I , to be dress means to be protect . any animal can be naked , but the dress and to be cover means I be different from a wild beast and I be a person .", "this be why I do not understand why people want to walk around naked -- all these people in the '60 . for I , to be dress means to be protect . any animal can be naked , but the dress and to be cover means I be different from a wild beast and I be a person . because we have to walk around naked . and all these german soldier look at we and appraise we .", "for I , to be dress means to be protect . any animal can be naked , but the dress and to be cover means I be different from a wild beast and I be a person . because we have to walk around naked . and all these german soldier look at we and appraise we . and so then we walk , again , five abreast , to the -- to the train .", "Q : and what -- what happen when they -- when you get there ? a : in Dachau they start to cut you hair and process you , take you clothes away and give you the minimum , like a pair of pajamas and a pair of fo -- shoe that do not fit . you be strip of everything you own , and -- and throw in with other prisoner . you do not know what be go on . you be a -- practically , you do not exist .", "then they load we up again on a train and send we to South Carolina , Fort Jackson . they -- I be home on furlough when the order come , do not come back to Florida , go to Fort Jackson , South Carolina . so I go there and we stay there a month for more , what they call strip down and preparation . then they ship we up to New Jersey , Fort can -- Camp Kilmer , near New Brunswick . there we have to stay two week to get we shot and we overseas equipment and all that stuff .", "woman hang by they breast ? babe in arm toss into the air and shot like clay pigeon ? naked young girl drag by they hair while ss man , with spike club tear they body apart . yes , I can truly say that that film rob I of my sleep on more than one occasion . this film be show before the tribunal a-as evidence of the infamous deed that the defendant be responsible for .", "he say , it seem that Lord Jollit -lrb- ph -rrb- , who be the chancellor of -- lord chancellor of England and keeper of the privy seal be here in Berlin , and he have express a desire to go down to Nuremberg and see the top nazi prisoner that you have down there . he say , now it so happen that he be travel in the plane that President Roosevelt give to Churchill , you know , the -- in the last election , the government change . so then he plane be at the british air strip in the british zone here in Berlin and if you report over there at 10 o'clock and take he -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- and take he down to Nuremberg and let he see the prisoner and entertain he on behalf of the -- the american army , I will greatly appreciate it . which of course that be just he very gentle , nice way of give I a order . and then he -- oh he -- first he ask I if I care to -- to smoke , a cigarette or a pipe or a cigar .", "when they really have mass production like at Buchenwald , they have -- at Buchenwald they have a battery of 12 furnace , and each furnace have four rack in it so they could cremate 48 body at one time . and then there be trap door underneath the furnace that the bone would drop down through and there be a grind mill down below that they grind up these bone and sack they for fertilizer . and Buchenwald , what they use to do , they would bring the people in to a room where there be hook all around the wall and tell they to undress , that they have to go in to a shower room and bathe . so they all take off they clothes and hang they on the hook and then they would go into the shower room . and this room be about 30 by 40 foot , and in the ceiling , it look a -- space all over the ceiling , it look like shower head .", "at the same time they be all march . I remember the black uniform in -- in Montbachkirche , the t -- main town hall be a great old traditional building , austrian style . beautiful all kind of statue and beautiful column and that -- and they be -- the main gate be about 10 foot wide and there be a german black uniform leave and right , beautiful blonde , and a -- they be hand -- sell -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- white -- white whatever you call it , a piece of the leather strip of that -- Q : -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- wait th -- one -- one second , one second . a : absolute power .", "and we have to take all we clothes off and we never see it again . they shave everybody , whoever have hair , wherever you have hair have to be shave , woman and man . and we come out and they give we strip clothing . and of course the woman go separate to a different one , we go separate . and have a -- one of those cap .", "a : three to a bunk , and there be three bunk right , and there be another one next to it again , so it be like 18 people in a square sort of thing . Q : could you sleep ? a : I would imagine so , you know , as a child , yes , you know , and a -- the problem be always , you know , if you gi -- when you get you piece of bread and you think you will put it under the -- inside you -- in you jacket because you sleep in you clothes , there be no undress . and you could not sleep . that be the only time I could not sleep , personally , you know , it -- when I know I have a piece of bread there .", "I be still a kid that time , and a -- but anyway , after a couple of week , we be in M\u00e1t\u00e9szalka and one day they come and they say , you -- you people be gon na go to work , and you go to Poland to work . we do not have nothing to say . and then they say , we be gon na examine you , and if you still have any jewelry or something -- they undress everybody naked , stark naked and they check you out from top to bottom , and if you have something hide or something , they beat you up like unbelievable . so finally they put we in wagon . and we do not know where we be go , but we wi -- wind up in Auschwitz-Birkenau .", "people -- if you be pregnant , he -- I do not care how old you be , if 18 or 20 or 15 , when he see that you be pregnant , that be to die . there be no question , as any pregnant woman be go to the -- to the crematorium . Q : be you undress at this point ? a : undressed , no , no . Q : okay .", "so once he find out that there be scarlet fever in barrack 27 , I be in the 27th barrack , he come in wa -- and the next day , must have be nine o'clock , I think , and he have always a sergeant walk with he . he do not have no gun , but the sergeant have the small pistol on -- on the side , I still remember they . so he use to come , and we have to stand naked , and he look at you . if you have like measles or pimple or something , that mean that you have the scarlet fever . and he take one look at you , he say wshht , this way .", "a : illegally . we -- we do it at night , we be on coal car , we -- when we be stop -- we pose at one point as Greeks and they send we child and -- and we ask for mayim , mayim , and we show they we want some water . the soldier search we , you know , we have to undress , my mother , I remember . it -- it be a very frightening time for we , and we find some place -- again , the s -- one man appear that come from the town that my -- my uncle know and he tell we where to go , where it be safe to stay . so --", "that be he interpretation , or he revenge . she be go to be the housekeeper and she be go to work for we . and I remember she in the kitchen do the noodle , you know , the old kind where you roll -- make the dough , you roll it out , and I be watch how she be cut it into strip . what else ? you know , I -- apparently she must have take care of I .", "they still give we no food or water . then one of the man go out to get some snow and be immediately shoot . so , in the morning -- -lsb- the best thing would be to read what I write because it be very detailed , and it go up to the first night in the camp itself in Auschwitz ... because on the whole ... -rsb- then we go from the barracks to another barracks where we have to ... where we be strip naked . we have we number tattoo ; all we belongings be take from we . we have to sign a document that we have be arrest in the ghetto Theresienstadt because of anti-german activity ; and that we accept we sentence .", "so we be wait there before , I think it be the child 's block , where the selection be be make . and when we come , the lager\u00e4lteste Schwartzhuber be already surround by bottle of alcohol and completely drunk . and everybody have to strip and to go up on the chimney . it be about as high as this -lsb- she point -rsb- , and as I say it be run through the whole block . build of brick , we have to go up the chimney naked , stand there , tell we age and profession .", "and everybody have to strip and to go up on the chimney . it be about as high as this -lsb- she point -rsb- , and as I say it be run through the whole block . build of brick , we have to go up the chimney naked , stand there , tell we age and profession . and I go there , and I say : I be a gymnastics teacher ; I be 18 year old . and he say -lsb- in german -rsb- : so make some gymnastics .", "we be shove in , that you could not even move . there be no food , nothing , and it be dark , you could not see . in ravensbr\u00fcck I remember go through that disinfectant area , and I come from where -- you know , we do not go naked anywhere , and I be so embarrassed be naked , and I try to cover myself up . I do not have much development yet , but still , I just -- the idea of do -- and I remember a woman put a stick to I , and she say in german , put you hand on the side . yell at I .", "Q : you give they -- a : I ask , because I also hear so many people tell I that they child , even grow up now , have a real , severe problem , so many of they have to have therapy . Q : well , it could have be that for you in you life , it sound like you parent be strip bare of , you know , of whatever give they might have be able to give . and so it sound like there be a real ef -- cause effect of what the war do , and they -- a : yeah .", "so , you know . and Pop use to cook sugar beet . and every -- they c -- they cut they in strip , and then they simmer they , and it make some sort of syrup . and he would cut they , and he be always hungry . and he would give I a si -- a little piece of -- half of that , and he say , do not tell Momma .", "we go swim together . she compile list of auto make for I . we clip out Rupert , the -- the comic strip , Rupert the Bear , from the newspaper and make picture book out of it . I be allow to read the newspaper . the newspaper use to come in in the evening , fall on the mat behind the front door , and I be allow to read it as long as I be -- take -- treat it neatly .", "and I be aware of many other name , from letter , photograph , occasional visit from out of town . Q : well , d-do -- do letter that you still have today , or those be the letter that you remember from the pre-war time ? a : no , I think too many time I be , like I have to undress and throw all my -- whatever I have and start from the beginning with -- with nothing from before . I have a picture of my family , it survive -- it survive in someone 's hand in Palestine , and I think that I have it on I . Q : oh , oh , that be great .", "I ma -- I make it , I be small -- I be small . and I do not know how I go through -- through the initial selection . I think that I go through the initial selection because I could not believe I see -- we already know , as we be undress , they already tell we . when we go one way , already people tell we , you go to life . and -- and I believer there be only maybe a hundred or 200 from the whole train , and the rest -- the rest go right away to -- the train which come a day before we , everybody go , the day after we , everybody else .", "so , I have a white jacket , because see , it be custom make still . I have from that time , so maybe I look a little bit stronger . but then we be -- we be undress , and there be that figure in black go back and forth , and it really fascinate I , like that -- that -- that situation of a man decide that or -- or -- and I be -- and I be look at -- at that -- at that assessment , a-and I be -- I be stare . when I come there , there be kind of a movement of resignation that he -- he put I there to -- li-like he kind of o-okay , put I to , and I think be it , do my stare do it ? my physic simply be not -- I be not like a person for work yet , never -- never do I see -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- .", "so , you arrive in -- in Auschwitz and you say that you do not go through initial selection . a : I do not . Q : you sel -- selection happen when you be already naked , and -- a : oh , no , I -- I -- there be -- there be a selection right away . Q : mm-hm , on the ramp ?", "but I decide that there be no way , no way anybody be go to take away my comb . but what do I do ? they search we , they -- we -- they strip we , we have to take we clothes off , how can I keep it ? so , we have wooden clog . I start kick the ground under I , and scratch and here , with all the woman around I , and I -- I kick a hole deep enough , and I bury my comb , with the hope that when I ever get out , I will find it .", "the officer among we captor be drive by in comfortable car , enjoy the sight of march subhuman creature . they spotless starch uniform be highly polish -- and highly pol-polished boot , must have be quite a contrast with the wreck and filth we be in . I remember when other be give to rest , we turn the seam of we prisoner strip clothes from inside out , and squashed as many lice as we could between we fingernail . the itch be unbearable . by now some of the event be blur .", "do they cap -- happen later , after you be liberate ? a : I -- I -- after liberation . but first of all , I have no recollection why I keep it , how I keep it , where I keep it , because the first thing when the russian soldier see we , th -- in what filth we be , they strip they shirt and they give to the woman . the woman , the first thing they have , they take off this full of lice clothes and throw it away . so , how do I keep it ?", "it be gas van -- murder by gas van . a : that be right . then , when they come , they unloaded this -- some of the prisoner -- other prisoner strip they . they thing be strip back in the ghetto . Q : do you know about this at the time if you think back ?", "a : that be right . then , when they come , they unloaded this -- some of the prisoner -- other prisoner strip they . they thing be strip back in the ghetto . Q : do you know about this at the time if you think back ? a : rumor .", "you can see the narrow window , and -- and the fireplace that be use . it be a little bit cover with a cloth , but be a source of heat and cooking for we . and this be where my father mount the -- this contraption with the -- the rubber strip , that we be burn for lighting . Q : Right . a : and -- and the -- the contraption be still there .", "I use to spend a lot of time at Fort Meade . Q : okay . a : and we use to go to Baltimore , because we have a bunch of young guy , they never have be at strip club on the East Baltimore Street , they have a lot of they . I guess that be pretty well know , that East Baltimore Street . and I -- if I want to get all my tu -- all my guy together , the best place to find they be at East Baltimore Street .", "it be not a joke there . it be something you do . Layouts , it be call strip . so I use that because it be really amusing . Q : so I assume that .", "so I use that because it be really amusing . Q : so I assume that . so what be you exactly strip ? Boxes out of lid or what ? a : no .", "Boxes out of lid or what ? a : no . strip be to put it be call photo offset printing , lithography . and they do something call Goldenrod , and the film on which the stuff be print be cut out and that be call strip . Q : Stripping .", "a : no . strip be to put it be call photo offset printing , lithography . and they do something call Goldenrod , and the film on which the stuff be print be cut out and that be call strip . Q : Stripping . a : and then they put it on a press .", "and I be hit over the head , if I tell you to stay here , then that be what you stay . and that be the last time I see my wonderful mother alive . then we have to form line , and from the line I be on , we be take to a freezing room , and we have all to , in front of soldier with they dog , we have to undress completely . and I try to explain to you that we all come from decent home , and we have never undress in front of stranger . not only because we have to get undressed , but we be check if we be hide thing in we private part .", "and that be the last time I see my wonderful mother alive . then we have to form line , and from the line I be on , we be take to a freezing room , and we have all to , in front of soldier with they dog , we have to undress completely . and I try to explain to you that we all come from decent home , and we have never undress in front of stranger . not only because we have to get undressed , but we be check if we be hide thing in we private part . after that long wait , we be give uniform and wooden shoe .", "Q : what do you see ? a : well , body . in fact , I -- I have no trouble understand what it be for , because they be in the process of dump more body in , all of they naked . they take -- they take off the rag that they have be wear , wash they , and then they would use they again , you see . but th --", "Q : the dog go visit too ? a : oh yeah , I mean , they go visit or -- or hide in the cellar , too . but at any rate , it be just a naked run really , from the safe sa -- place , to this -- and it be not too long , and so I figure a couple mile , maybe . then we load it all up , and come back . and of course , that be the loneliest automobile trip I ever make .", "so , my father be afraid . they take people , Jews , take they and they say it be go to work , but there be no work . they make these big ditch , and people have to undress , put it in , and dance over it and sing , and the word be -- very few come home after . so , my father be afraid to just disappear . my father be afraid to go out .", "Q : tell I a little bit about what happen then with you and you father after arrive in Birkenau , and what happen later . a : I be in Birkenau , we be , they take off we clothes . we be naked , just as we be bear , shave -- cut-off we hair be cut-off . and , we be take , my father ask , yeah inside they take a part to the left and the other part to the right , beat we . we separate , one on one side -- one part on one side , other part .", "the hunger properly combine with taste with something to eat would create a good taste . and this be the life in the wood . always afraid , always half naked . Q : how do you stay warm in the winter ? a : in the winter ?", "and -- and I have these responsibility , and I want out , and I want to go home , I have a girlfriend . I just could not wait to go back to the States . and I see -- I see Vienna naked . Q : what do that mean ? a : mean that I see its real character .", "maybe my mother , my mother teach he . I do not know . n : and , um , well , I mean this be a pretty private question , but I suppose that you yourself would have be recognize as a jewish boy if you be make to undress ? and you be in ... s : of course , I be .", "be you ? do you have to hide ? s : no , because we be never naked . n : Sorry ? s : only when we go into shower .", "n : Sorry ? s : only when we go into shower . n : you be never naked ? s : only when you go into shower and then nobody see we . n : how come nobody see you in shower ?", "n : not even warm . s : yeah . you never undress there . n : so , you be never in a situation where there be other boy in the shower ? s : no .", "n : be you ever concern about be see ? s : you know , it might be part of the Catholic mentality . that they do not want to , they do not want to , they do not want to see one naked boy and another naked boy . n : I see . and be you ever concern ?", "n : I see . so it be not a common occurrence . and so you be not undress . s : no . there be no need to .", "n : Mhm . s : push you against the wall , you have about three soldier behind you with arm , but they never look inside my shoe . n : and they never make you undress ? s : no . they touch the body , but uh , the arm , and the stomach and the leg , but they never look in the shoe .", "and here , throughout we , throughout the , you know , we rank and throughout the prison , there be a story about one of these woman , they wear , she wear ride clothes . and what she would do , and I do not know if I should tell you this . this be what , the word be out that she would strip , and you would give she a candy bar or something . you know , and then she would report the time , you know , the day , and the soldier be , would be discipline . but when I get there , so I be nervous of she .", "this photo be one of the boxcar with the side door open . here be another photo of that . and after we get in and be give duty assignment , we be give a tour by some of the prisoner which include the they show we the gas chamber where they line up the concentration prisoner and have they undress and go through the what they think be go to be a shower , a delouse shower . and they march they into these gas chamber and gas they . and then right in the room next to the gas chamber be a large room that have the body just throw helterskelter , just mount up like cord wood , again wait to be burn in the furnace which be in a adjacent part of that building .", "but before I gon na go to the thought of the german the american Army after have see what happen to we there they go to next town , that be Weimar and they confiscate first they bring wagon with water , because we do not have no more water . we do not take no shower , we do not take no bath , so they give we bath . we walk for , I think , two day without clothes , naked , everything , because that be more sanitary than wear those old , lousy clothes . they burn everything what we be wear . Q : this be while you be in Buchenwald ?", "as long as it be far away , you could still live and think of you student , because he never leave the place where he live , because he live in that place where we bridge be blow up , he would have be trap and he leave that place because he do not want to leave he patient without a doctor . that be the type of man he be . because he do not know when the Germans be coming , and people would say do not stay in this place because you will trap when the bridge be blow up , because they know that Holland would have be that strip of land that would be immediately Germany . you would be trap . but he say , I do not know when that will happen so I can not leave my patient .", "it be misery . I be sit next to the director of one of the department store . we do not even undress . we just sit on the straw mattress and we smile at each other and say this be not the place that we expect to go back in . we really do not expect it .", "it be always a upheaval when Mengele come . he be so elegant , and he look so good ; and he would ... he would just somehow with he sight terrorize the people and put fear in they . and we have to run naked in front of he , and he would and he would select ... `` life '' ... `` death '' ... -lrb- snap finger -rrb- ... `` life '' ... `` death . '' he just with he hand motion . one day Edith say , `` you know , I do not feel good anymore .", "and I see people work on damage plane . uh , there be airplane . and later on , I find out that that be ... Auschwitz be part of where they repair -- plane that be damage during the war be strip , use for spare part . and also I remember see these uh ... they be sort of balloon , so that plane can not fly too low . and I have no idea what purpose they be ; but there be to prevent plane from fly very far .", "so that when -lrb- excuse I -rrb- when the Russians be get closer in Plasz\u00f3w , they do not want we to be free ... they take we to Gross Rosen . and in Gross Rosen , they uh ... we be wait there and in process of be send to another work camp . but before ... uh we ... they determine if we be go to be send to a work camp or where , we be force to strip naked in front of a. . . a doctor or somebody .", "01:08:56 I do not have even civilian clothes with I . so they give I some kind of clothes from the ... from they warehouse , which do not fit on I . which be ... I be almost naked . and I receive order to present myself to the to the regiment in R\u00eemnicu S_rat . and it be ... it be a problem to , uh , to take the train and to make the journey to ... to , uh , R\u00eemnicu S_rat , because everybody , it be military .", "so he do . he do . so when we be uh ... we get the normal strip clothes , and we be take to we barracks . this time we be uh place in the Barrack number 10 . this Barrack number 10 have ... have a special history ; because there use to be woman in that barrack , and later on it be the experimental block again -- the same block .", ". of Tabak , cigarette Tabak -lsb- nb : tobacco -rsb- what I find in the Kanada . and on the way back , they let we ... undress we , naked , and they find the cigarette . and for that I get a two month ... two month in the Straf company -lsb- nb : strafkommando = `` punishment brigade '' -rsb- . the Straf company be the ... everybody know what a straf company ... company be .", "I come to Mauthausen . I be in one month in Mauthausen , in the so-called quarantine . naturally , when we arrive we be uh ... strip what we have . I have relative good clothes . and in my pocket -- to we bad luck , Magda get from a woman from Bratislava a check to the uh ... to one of the english bank .", "maybe it be safer with you . '' unfortunately , it work out if it would stay with she she could keep it . I could not ; because when we come to Mauthausen , they strip we . they steal all we uh better clothing what we have . and I do not have ... I be not think on it ; and even if I would think it on it to take it out from my pocket , I have not the where to hide it .", "it be it be in a government building , the yar -- they yard . the gendarme , you know , the gendarme , the gendarme , with the bayonet fix on the -- they take helpless child and they mother 's arm and old lady and the woman , the Rabbi and they tell 3 Hear , O Israel -lrb- Hebrew -rrb- ; declaration of God 's unity and watchword of jewish faith . everybody to undress . `` what be the matter with you , jew bastard , mother fucker . where you hide you , you jewelry , necklace ?", "so one day , the german guard take we over to schachendorf concentration camp . we have to march through the , the border , hungarian-austrian border . we march through , at the border , border we have to undress , and take everything away . just leave whatever pair of pants , two pair of pants or whatever you have , some clothes . some of they do not have winter coat .", "there be time when they take kid , in the village , they take they to Germany and I be very scared because I be circumcise and I think that whenever they have something like that surround and take the kid to Germany from the village , I be hide and very fast because they use to say they take they a certain place and because the Germans want only healthy people , so somewhere near they would take they to quarantine and check whether they do not have any t.b. . they want healthy people . so I be afraid if I be go to undress before doctor , they will recognize that I be jewish . so , I be very sure , at the risk of my life to escape those situation where they could not catch I to Germany . funny thing , sometimes I figure I could have go because one of my neighbor boy be catch then he escape from Germany he tell I do not have anything like that .", "I wind up with a skirt , my mother wind up with a mini , so we switch and the wooden shoe . then the last act be they paint a stripe , a red stripe down we back and that break I up . talk about panic , and we walk naked in front of the guy , in front of the Germans and in front of polish copo . somehow , I take this whole thing without shed a tear , but when they paint that stripe on my back , I start cry . again , one of the Poles walk over to I , hug I and say , `` do not worry , you will survive .", "there be another young girl she have a groin abscess which be drain for week and month . I mean the woman with the leg , I remember once I want to wash my famous dress , I mean we have nothing . so , if you want to wash a dress you borrow something from a patient and wear that for a day and wash the dress and the patient be lie naked . condition be pretty horrid , but as I say , they be still feed we . we get the bread in the morning , and we , the personnel do not have to stay and it be get cold .", "there be this big room with all kind of bundle . they make the people leave the bundle and there be sick people . some of they be lame , but we manage to undress they and put they clothes in those little fish net bag and once they go through the thing , the steam would kill the vermin , and they could go on the other side and find they own clothes . there be one woman who be in a coma , and the Germans keep say , `` throw she out . she be half dead , she be dead . ''", "they do it deliberately and gradually . one step at a time , one humiliation . the fact when we get to Auschwitz and they undress we and we have to march in front of man . and the woman , there be religious woman , elderly woman , young girl , and I be a young girl . I never undress myself in front of any one .", "the fact when we get to Auschwitz and they undress we and we have to march in front of man . and the woman , there be religious woman , elderly woman , young girl , and I be a young girl . I never undress myself in front of any one . here I have to march naked in front of a bunch of man . this be all humiliation .", "and the woman , there be religious woman , elderly woman , young girl , and I be a young girl . I never undress myself in front of any one . here I have to march naked in front of a bunch of man . this be all humiliation . this be all make people subhuman .", "probably I be never very fat , but I do not remember notice that I get thinner . no , I never really look at myself . you never look at yourself naked , well maybe I really think of it I would have look at the arm , but you try to keep warm , you know , you try to keep bundle up . you do not notice whether you be get thinner or not . Q : be there lice because people be not clean ?", "I be together with , with two people who I know that one of they be a father of a friend of mine who go to school with , I go to school with . and another friend who I get lose -- I mean I get -- when we get to the camp which we do not know what it be , you know , they stop the car . they herd we into a building and we have to undress and all that . that be where I lose he . but with the father -- it happen that the father of the other friend -- as it happen , I be , I be together with he in this -- in the concentration camp block , block .", "and I be lucky , on this little boat we go to the left side of the bay and there be a u-boat schule9 -- now , what be that ? submarine school , submarine school . and we tie up this boat and we be naked and drown and no shoe and no nothing . hardly any , any -- you know , maybe some kind of a shirt but -- not even shirt . we do not have shirt .", "it be the same thing ... the beating , the hunger , the thirst , the heat , the cold . -lrb- pause -rrb- and the beating . he would come in the morning and he would have a dozen people strip naked and and whip they in front of the rest of they just because he like it and he would stand there smile . the slightest infraction of the rule ... they would bury you in the sand , just you head stick out and the Arabs would urinate on you , and if you move you head , they would open you skull . they have little trick like that .", "to go to Fort for fifteen day mean water and bread , fifteen day . seventy-five gram of bread a day and a cup of water . they would tie you arm behind you back and hang you on you wrist , like this and they would hang you on you arm , oh for a night , a day , two day , till finally you arm would hang out of the socket , and then they would come in , strip you down in the middle of the night , strip you naked and put the hose on you . and I take the cold that be at night , we get more cold . the hose do not do just a easy job on you .", "I get real good at it . we have rag . mostly we be naked . we have nothing . we delouse ourselves .", "five more month in the camp , and die more and more and more in these five month . finally the British come and get we out . they come down the dune with they they tank and half-truck and they see a bunch of sick people , drag they ... themselves around , naked and half-naked with long hair , unshaven , dirty , filthy , sick , weak . who be they ? who be you people ?", "if he would have come with we he might have be survive . so we go to Auschwitz , it be in the fall already . it be in the fall because I remember when we get dress naked , the frost be stick to my foot . Q : you think this be ' 42ish ? a : I think it be ' 42ish , yeah .", "it be a polish guy who be the bookkeeper here . 02:17:02 and then right away , `` here be a piece of bread , here be a bowl of soup , '' and right away I be a whole macherthere , you know . and I share it with my bother , you know , and then they tell we to take off we clothes , it be frosty , completely naked , and the frost be -- we foot be glue . and send into the shower , shave the head -- the shower , and come out the other way , and we get striped clothes and we get we bowl . `` this be you property . ''", "a : yes , yes , he be aware of that , because as a matter of fact I be friendly with he . he be always a cook , and he always cook . so after when we would send food from one camp to another camp , I be maybe in 15 of they , but I do not know the location because they use to send boy to build air strip . it mean take big stone , break they up , make gravel , and then cover with cement . and every camp have a little kitchen .", "or group ? anything like that , when they pass by you or ... ? a : well , when they be take there be selection hold , you know , selection hold once in a while see who still have some meat on they , like everyone have to get naked outside you know , and mengeledr . Mengele come out , and you have to present yourself , either you be send to the barrack or send on the side . the one that send on the side , they go to block number seven , seven , and they put a `` l '' on they here .", "First of all , it be break up stone with a big sledge hammer into small piece . once they be break up , you have to load up truck with they very fast . and the truck be drive to the air strip . and after the truck we walk toward the air strip and distribute the break up little stone , gravel stone , nice evenly over the whole area , as much as be necessary , as a lot . and then we wait , wait for the cement truck to come .", "once they be break up , you have to load up truck with they very fast . and the truck be drive to the air strip . and after the truck we walk toward the air strip and distribute the break up little stone , gravel stone , nice evenly over the whole area , as much as be necessary , as a lot . and then we wait , wait for the cement truck to come . and we have to go in with the foot to the cement and be give big broom to push the cement , even out .", "a : railroad track also . Q : be this kind of activity go on throughout you whole time there ? a : no , it be air strip and railroad track , air strip , railroad track , what else be there , that be practically it . Q : now , be this earlier on ? a : no , that be that be already -- I think it be the last , the last that be the beginning of ' 45 , because I remember the air raid be come , and that be we only relief , because it be near the wood where we build this air strip , and when the Allies be coming , we be order to run into the wood to hide .", "a : no , it be air strip and railroad track , air strip , railroad track , what else be there , that be practically it . Q : now , be this earlier on ? a : no , that be that be already -- I think it be the last , the last that be the beginning of ' 45 , because I remember the air raid be come , and that be we only relief , because it be near the wood where we build this air strip , and when the Allies be coming , we be order to run into the wood to hide . when we run into the wood we use to grab the leaf , dry leaf from the tree , and we have the paper from the cement paper , and roll they up and we smoke just to relieve the hunger . and the plane be come so low , you hold on to , and they be british , they be the Royal Air Force we could see .", "um ... what happen um ... as indeed thing change , and the war draw closer ? a : when the real war come closer , I still ... I have my kindergarten . it be true that all the doctor and the lawyer , they be strip from they um possibility to work . because it be already start the war . and um ... but I do not have even to wear a. .", "`` but have something to eat . '' I say , `` no , this be my food . '' and , anyway ... so the next what be they ... like I tell you before , they undress all what we have um ... they put we ... like I be say there in the article . Q : tell we on tape . I want ... tell we exactly how they treat you .", "I want ... tell we exactly how they treat you . a : yeah . they undress everything what we have . now they let we stand there naked . then they shave we head with blunt scissors , so we head be all bruise -- at least mine .", "a : yeah . they undress everything what we have . now they let we stand there naked . then they shave we head with blunt scissors , so we head be all bruise -- at least mine . and then the man , laugh man , stand I on the chair and shave everywhere what be hair .", "ten at a time . and we have to go in , and with we head in . and then naked , wet , we stand in that freezing cold wintry day 'til we get the remnant of russian prisoner of war uniform , which be cotton top and cotton pants . and mine do not have a button on top and a button on the pants . so I have to hold on to ... not to lose it .", "so I have to hold on to ... not to lose it . and then we get wooden clog , which we never be use to it . and so ... and naked and barefooted ... and then that be how it be . the start . we ... we think look one each other , we do not recognize .", "it be also a implant thing . but they know about it . so they let the woman undress totally naked ; and when somebody have a little mark of scratch , in they go to the gas chamber . then later , i. . .", "on ss order , all my possession be take away . and I be dip in murky water in large bin , ten at a time . then I stand wet and naked , shake in the wintery cold 'til I get remnant after the russian prisoner of war . cotton pants and top . on mine , all the button be miss ; so I have to hold the top and bottom with my hand , not to lose they .", "he say , `` be happy we be here because they be finish . '' at night when they take we into the barrack ... the barrack be near , I be just about ... I would say 50 meter from the gate to the gas chamber . it be at the same place where the people undress themselves . the man undress themselves , there be a well ... just take out whatever ... and over there we have the barrack we go to live in . why I mention the well , because I tell you what the well be .", "at night when they take we into the barrack ... the barrack be near , I be just about ... I would say 50 meter from the gate to the gas chamber . it be at the same place where the people undress themselves . the man undress themselves , there be a well ... just take out whatever ... and over there we have the barrack we go to live in . why I mention the well , because I tell you what the well be . people they know already , not from the begin like from Warsaw they transport ... they start on the 22nd of July 1942 , so people they know already what Treblinka be .", "we find a piece ... a piece of bread . we find sometime a bottle of water which be a really ... some of they they bring in other thing to eat , but over there those people they work in Treblinka no. 2 , they have no chance . all they get be naked people go in and dead people take out from the gas chamber . Q : how long do you work as a barber in the gas chamber ? a : in the gas chamber we be work as a barber over there between 2 ... little more than 2 week .", "a : in the gas chamber we be work as a barber over there between 2 ... little more than 2 week . not for 3 week . and then they decide that the barber will not go in anymore to the gas chamber to cut off the hair of the woman over there , but in the undress barracks , they divide a part ... let 's say like you take here , divide a part and on this side they put the same thing . bench around and we cut the hair off , not in the gas chamber anymore . that be the last time ... the 3 ... the 2 or 3 week we work over there , we work .", "I myself for 4 month I do not see a woman with clothes . all I do be my job in the gas chamber . all these people be all naked without any clothing . first time I see a woman it be strange to I to see a woman . and she be so nice .", "we do also in that small ghetto organize like a little restaurant where people , you know , cooking , buy this that . what we do ... I have a brother-in-law , and this other gentleman by the name of Eisner , he have a brother-in-law also . and they be run around almost naked without anything . what we do ... we take out money and we say , `` here be a room . you buy all kind of food you can get .", "I do not want to go in . '' I say , `` if you be not go in , I be not go in either . '' what it happen , people go in and they with dynamite they destroy the whole land of that strip about 6 , 7 house . take out 3 , 4 ... 3 story , 4 story , 2 story and all the people get kill . the rest of the people the judenrat and most of the police they take to the cemetery and they kill they .", "they be put into a big machine or something like that , in a container and which supposedly be heat up so that it should kill these lice but they never be kill . they be only worse every time that when you get you clothes back . and meantime you go -- have to go to a shower bath and the ss -- male and female -- be , we be totally naked . we be stand around . they be stand there talk to one another , laugh they head off that we be all stand there in -- with nothing on helplessly .", "keep there , and soak wet , with very little to eat . what we bring , gather in that one hour which I mention when the police bang on we door . everything we be strip of . the only thing , as I mention , we be allow to be take the clothes which we have on , a blanket and some pot and pan . now from that place about three or four day later , when enough Jews be gather , we be put on horse-drawn cart and we be take into a brick factory nearby .", "a : when uh Mengele motion to I to the right , of course , I go immediately into the group where my father and my older brother be . because then they would be separate man and woman . and we be take to a building where we be strip from everything now , even what we have on we back . every ... everything we have to leave . and we be shaven , and everywhere where you can imagine .", "once they enter into that large room and the door be lock , they would let gas in there . now , what the terrible thing be in ... one of the ... one of the lucky thing , in a way , for I ... the terrible thing be they would be dead . of course , they would be stark naked . they would be send we to go and pick up the dead body who they just gas , and ... and cart they up to the crematoria . my ... as I say , lucky for I , be that I be not the one at the time who belong to the Sonderkommando .", "no matter how small ; but the idea we buy present . and ... but we have absolutely nothing to give . the ss strip we of everything . then I come up with the idea ; and I go to my brother -- whose name be Zoltan . and I say , `` why do not we give he we ration of bread for the day ? ''", "they be draft soldier for the russian army . be I be on the russian side , we have to go to a draft board . of course , it be real strange because we be naked and most of the people be woman , you know . and , uh , when they be measure you and this and that , and they ask I what kind of education I get , I say I get high school and I get electronics . and she say you be a lieutenant in the russian army .", "you see these wagon ... pull people . and the leg stick out here , and the head and a head . and they just throw some on ; they be naked , they be in prison outfits . and uh can you imagine ... we go to work , we come back be a band playing . a first class band .", "it be be many year . we be -lsb- in -rsb- Gusen . and look like we come in and everybody over there be naked , because they get some typhus or something . and so they take everybody 's clothes away . and they also kill a few people there , because they ration be very little .", "Q : I see . you pocket be empty . you have be strip . you can not cut you wrist . what do you do ?", "so they put we in a empty room , like 100 at a time . and all of a sudden , like woman dress like nurse come and tell we to turn the face to the wall . you know , a hundred of we , naked . all of a sudden they come out ; and a hundred naked woman on the other side . well , in today 's time , that would make a nice x-rated movie that , would not it ?", "and all of a sudden , like woman dress like nurse come and tell we to turn the face to the wall . you know , a hundred of we , naked . all of a sudden they come out ; and a hundred naked woman on the other side . well , in today 's time , that would make a nice x-rated movie that , would not it ? but nobody have any think in that direction .", "so everybody get curious . you say , `` where you from ? '' people be run around naked . nobody know naked , you just see up to here . `` where you from ? ''", "you say , `` where you from ? '' people be run around naked . nobody know naked , you just see up to here . `` where you from ? '' `` what happen to my mother ? ''", "`` I think you ... be you from Slonim ? '' `` be you from here ? '' people forget they be naked . and those nurse come up and say , `` oh , my God ! would you all get back in you place ? ''", "and those nurse come up and say , `` oh , my God ! would you all get back in you place ? '' -lrb- laugh -rrb- you know , people be run around like that ; and ... and nobody even notice that people be naked , you know . they be so overcome , look for relative , and ... and something from home that just ... the scene like that , they will stay with you the rest of you life . Q : you tell I before the interview that you be in Landsberg , the dp camp in Landsberg .", "and now in the barracks where the , uh , people , where there be six hundred in a barracks , there be two and three people in each bunk . they be so skinny from malnutrition that , uh , two people could sleep side by side very easily and they , there be so few bunk they have to take turn sleep . and , uh , uh , I take picture , movie inside the barracks and , uh , I will never forget these people be so weak that the one who have , be stronger , would strip the clothes off of the weak one who could not fight back and put those clothes on themselves because they be better for instance than they own . none of these people be issue clothes . they have uniform and when the uniform wear out at this late stage of the war , why they be nude .", "Q : what else do you see in camp ? a : well , as I say , the people be line up , uh , uh , to , uh , go to these , uh , soup mill ... or kitchen or soup pot and what always strike I so odd , the people would be walk without shirt or without pants on , and they do not think anything of it ; they be so use to see human nude most of the time . they strip they everyday and hose they down . this be story that they tell we later . but I actually see and have movie of people walk around without clothes on and think nothing of it .", "but most of the fellow remember the smell because they be city boy . they have not , uh , be expose to this type of thing . so and as I say , uh , have think it since then , we be in order and we be use to it because we have see these body along the road for a few day before we get to the camp and , uh , we have see these strip uniform and these these human skeleton that , uh , be dead as we go by they , as we go , as we be spear-heading . Q : be there anything else about Mauthausen that strike you in particular ? a : well , the the security they have : they have the , they build another stone wall between the double electrify fence which be the original partition between the , the german officer ' quarter ; they have a double electrify fence with this trench in between with barb wire on the ground over the trench and , uh , the the security that they have to provide for themselves to keep these people from climb over the wall to get at they .", "then quickly open this window on the water ... on the water-side and jump into the water , in the canal . '' so we be stiff with cold and fear again , and we put we clothes close behind we and we lie down on this bed . who dare to undress , you know ? and behold , the little dog start to bark , and we jump out of the water , out of the window , in the canal . do not ask I , `` now , how or or what or how do you come back ? ''", "and mind you these be all man do this on woman to just further dehumanize we . I mean woman try to be modest , try to cover up , but there be nothing to cover up with . we be stark naked standing there . and we go through this dehumanizing ... uh ... process of be shave by all these man after which we be all give a clean dress . it be a grey ... like a man 's shirt , a grey shirt , but very long .", "the -lsb- sauna -rsb- be a place where ... where they ... they disinfect station ... be a disinfect station . whatever we have with we , it be ... what we be carry with we , they take away everything . we have to strip completely and they be internal ... they be check we out completely ... if we do not hide something . Yah ? gold or ... or jewelry or something like that .", "gold or ... or jewelry or something like that . and they take we in a very cold room . I be freezing , all naked , and there they be ... be a whole group of barber and they ... uh strip we hair completely . Yah . all over .", "that ... that be not heat . nothing ! we be all naked . after that they ... they bring we in a place where they give we these uniform . Yah ?", "after that they ... they bring we in a place where they give we these uniform . Yah ? the strip prisoner uniform . then we know what it be , and nothing else . all we ... clothing , civil clothing and everything be go .", "and then they take we in . they frisk we . they take my ... a matron take my mother and I in a room and tell we to strip and ... uh ... and ... uh ... the matron say to I , `` be not you afraid ? '' I say , `` no . '' -lrb- laughing -rrb- and then ... and then ... uh ... they ask to see we id , so my father produce we fake id and they say , `` who do you think you be kid .", "sometimes they take people out any time , anybody to do different kind of work . what they do , they cut the hair of the woman . the woman go to the gas chamber after the man and then they stop , about one or two barracks before the gas chamber be a barrack where they leave they luggage and they have to undress ; and there be a barrack the next to the gas chamber where they cut at randomly , they cut the hair of the woman . they utilize it . they send it back to Germany ; they do for brush , for everything .", "if the polish transport be -- the polish Jews know more what be go on . they know they be go to death and also they be more religious and the woman come in 3 Oberscharf\u00fchrer Gustav Wagner 4 Oberscharf\u00fchrer Hubert Gomerski and we be young boy , 20 , 22 , five , and we be stand there . 01:38:30 they come naked in , and we have to cut they hair . there be a horrible yell and scream for all these , from know , from feel they go to the gas chamber . on top of that , they be ashamed to put it in .", "when we arrive there , we smell the smoke . be dark . and when we get out from the wagon , we see people out the door strip dress ... uh , coat . they be polish people , mostly . they speak yiddish ; and they say , `` you have to do separate lane ... uh , line .", "and we see a big side light on the ... direct towards we , that ... and on there be stay a very nice look ss man . and we find out later that man be Mengele . and beside he there be some helper -- people with those strip coat ; and with the ... he hand he point to people . and because I be not on he side on the line -- I be the inside line -- he point to I , and come two man . they grab I and put I out from the line , on the right side .", "and some also very bad shoe ; and they put we immediately , still wet , outside in the ... in the yard . outside the wash building . and there , from far away , be the men also ; because we see people with those strip coat . and up today , I think -- and maybe be just imagine -- that I see my father between they . but I have ... I be not sure .", "but uh we very much afraid of lice . during the Auschwitz stage , I pass two time through a selection . there come doctor from uh ... I do not know from where , ss doctor ; and we ... we ... naked , we shoot past in front of they . and if somebody have some little uh sign on he ... on he uh body , this for put on the left . and they take they to the crematorium .", "and we be fight for a whole new world mean for everybody and for a larger number of Jews , and even if there be a few casualty there always be in war . and the last point I want to make with you gentleman be that they should remain here . if you come from Germany from the american commander to find out if the Jews here be go to flee , if I have anything to do I will see to it that they will leave this country nakt und barfuss , they will go out naked and barefoot because they should not go out . well , you know , this be zero for four . we have see four people , the Ambassador , the Prime Minister , the Cardinal , and then the communist leader , and you get no sympathy from any of they .", "well , some people run and they try to get people out of that jail . but nobody succeed . these thousand man be take out to a forest near we city by the name of Kuzhi , where they be make to dig they own grave , they be make to get undressed naked , they be shoot and they be cover with earth . how do we know exactly what happen there ? the farmer in the area .", "you know , she be take to another side which I be not too sure whether she be take to be kill or to another side of the camp . my group of woman from the age of 16 to 25 , we be take into a very large room , group by group , I do not know 200 or whatever , I really do not know exactly the count . we be tell to get completely undressed naked , the guard stand around and around . you know when I think of that moment I still remember how I do not know which part to hide . should I cover the top , should I cover the bottom .", "they say you have next to you dead , take it out . and then it be you know very cold and many people think gee , I will take that blanket or the dress of the dead and put it over I so I will keep warm . so many , many of these body be already naked . that be why you see sometime picture near the barracks that be naked because we figure , `` they be dead . they do not need that garment .", "and then it be you know very cold and many people think gee , I will take that blanket or the dress of the dead and put it over I so I will keep warm . so many , many of these body be already naked . that be why you see sometime picture near the barracks that be naked because we figure , `` they be dead . they do not need that garment . maybe I will save my life . ''", "it be hard for he to listen . and we have three lovely child , who be good human being . somehow we survivor , because we suffer , because we need , because be hungry , because be naked , implant in we child to be sensitive to those need . and most of they really grow up to be involve in help other human being . document and photograph -lrb- 1 -rrb- as I tell you , my aunt and my uncle , Mr. and Mrs. Jaffe , live in New York -- they come here in 1928 .", "the Poles in the community , the the gentile in the community be against we too . I be not go to say all of they . I would not be alive today if it be all of they , but a great number be and uh we part of the country be a very poor part of the country and I guess the the looting be what uh what appeal to a lot of the people , be able to uh to accumulate somebody ... you know , take over somebody else 's wealth and even though by the time we come into the ghetto a lot of it be strip , but it be still some thing . when you talk about a community where people do not even have shoe ... uh my husband still kid I about I come from a small town where you walk barefoot . you only put on you shoe when you come to the market place .", "a. . . a barrack or whatever you want to call it , open up and they tell we to undress . and , of course , you know , the ss be walk around there and there be so many girl that do not want to underess completely and they start beat on they and they have to get undressed . and then they start shave we head and ... uh ... I remember stay there and these ss walk around we and if the girl would put down they head , just try to , just try to hide , they would come up and they would take they whip and they would pull they head up like this with the whip and they would look at we and then they would start whipping we .", "little do I know that she have , she have poison that she carry with she and she keep it for the last minute , if necessary . I find that out when we get to Ravensbruek and we stay in line to go into the bath house and she ask I while we be stay in line if , if I think that , be it time or not yet ? and I say , `` oh , let 's wait and see , '' and by the time we get in and we be order to strip and give everything away , she do not have it anymore . 02:20:00 Q : could you tell I about the arrival in Ravensbruek , please ?", "I think I be first , and we get consecutive number and from then on we have no name , just number , and then we go to the bath house . we -- as I say they take away we clothes . 02:23:05 we have to strip . everybody be shave . I do not know by what miracle Pepi and I be not shave .", "usually they catch . they catch two of they and they take out the whole camp there one night and they be hang he publicly like everybody should see . they wake we up in the middle of the night and everybody come out naked almost and it be not even -- they tell they to take off . everybody be half naked outside and be February , I think -- the beginning of March cold . terribly .", "they catch two of they and they take out the whole camp there one night and they be hang he publicly like everybody should see . they wake we up in the middle of the night and everybody come out naked almost and it be not even -- they tell they to take off . everybody be half naked outside and be February , I think -- the beginning of March cold . terribly . and a lot of we get pneumonia .", "when I remind myself , I want to cry now . it be my job . people naked , half naked . Ladies ! men !", "you be go to get a shower and a uniform , and everything you possess if somebody have something from the 68 ghetto , whatever it be . there be a new german at a table and give it to they . you have to be completely undress when you go into the shower . we know . we hear about the story of the crematorium and this , but somehow we do not feel this a work camp and the guy say , do not worry .", "there be 5,000 people in this camp and maybe there be a couple thousand people . they call a transport in the train and they come from other place and put everything over there . we have to undress and we have to go into in this ______ . we have to wait but we do not know . we do not see people come out .", "my father be go but I can not . I be too young , but my father do not want to raise he hand to say he be not a doctor , but jewish people be a lot of intelligent people . but before the people , they tell they before they tell the people that have the uniform before they go to the back , undress I be go to give special 71 work for you . you be go to go inside and take out with you hand whatever you find this . you have to take out the waste from the people with they hand .", "once in a while they build a nice it be a barrack but it be better than the first one . and they have a little corridor and they be so ______ even in a work camp . they put in the people in the shower and most of they then we be all man and some man have a 83 desire , and they put a woman undress , completely naked and she would go and maneuver the water to make the water , to turn on the water . and there I be afraid . I be alive but some people be still in the man have a desire for a woman .", "I know the Germans be be be kill the Jews , but I do not know what they would do ... they have camp like this to ... you know , I do not . exterminate so many people ... I do not know . so I meet those people with the with the strip uniform and already they take off ... I do not know if they take because they take off they Juda -lrb- ph -rrb- ... you know , that ... so I give they a lot of food and they ... I give they clothes , and one day i go before uh uh ... I forget the name of the town ... before Auschwitz ... ... Q : do not worry about name of town ... a : no , no , no , no .", "question : before I ask you about the liberation , be there anything else , any particular story that you remember about the time that you live with the Janssens that you would like to to tell now ? answer : well , I can tell you something that tie right in to the day of liberation . one of the side element of the air war be a effort by the ally to disturb the german communication , and for a time they would drop lot of uh little strip of black paper with aluminum foil attach to they , which I guess uh disrupt radar and what happen I guess uh fly through a radar net that otherwise might detect plane that be come through , so we kid make a game of this . and we would go out in the field and hunt all those strip of paper and use they for art project . I still have a calendar for example that that where I make the backing out of out of those little bit of paper which we call silver paper .", "answer : well , I can tell you something that tie right in to the day of liberation . one of the side element of the air war be a effort by the ally to disturb the german communication , and for a time they would drop lot of uh little strip of black paper with aluminum foil attach to they , which I guess uh disrupt radar and what happen I guess uh fly through a radar net that otherwise might detect plane that be come through , so we kid make a game of this . and we would go out in the field and hunt all those strip of paper and use they for art project . I still have a calendar for example that that where I make the backing out of out of those little bit of paper which we call silver paper . and the area in which we be , atypical for the Netherlands , be solidly catholic .", "if you talk to they , they would respond . that be how I get the answer I do . one other thing be they mention that when they would beat these soldier -- or these prisoner -- or hang they up , they would strip they down nude . if you look at the body that you will see in these pile , you would see the black and blue mark of bruise on what be leave of the skin and so forth . and I mention about the expression .", "Q : where it be , what it be -- wait a minute . okay . a : this be a picture of a man , one of the prisoner , hold up a specimen bottle that have three strip of tattoo , the skin that be cut off the body of the prisoner that give they life for that practically . and these be the type thing that they would sew into the lamp that they be make as part of the lamp , the top part . there be many lamp make .", "do not volunteer that ... uh ... we be sick . '' we do not know what he mean , but ... uh ... so anyway all everybody come off the train and ... uh ... we have to leave everything on the train . naked . you know . they take over all the clothes , everything .", "you know . they take over all the clothes , everything . naked . and you stand in the line and mengele be sit there , Dr. Mengele they call he .", "you use to ... you put we to the , you know , throw we ... throw the people to ... uh ... the barb wire and ... and they get electrocute right there and die . and ... and crawl ... there be a man ... man ... uh ... in a man 's barracks and winter and it be cold . naked , they make he run around in the snow up to here , naked , and beat he up and same thing they do to the woman . -lrb- sigh -rrb- we be just there ... uh ... there for a long time and sit by the barb wire and every day , they ... they come in and they just beat we up , beat we up . they be ... they bring the food , you know , that little no-good food .", "a place that be ... you dig out potato and ... uh ... some start ... I do not know ... a lot of girl start ... uh ... go out there and ... uh ... they bring back some stuff to eat and what do you think ? they catch they . it be about 10 girl , and they catch they and they put they outside naked at night , and they ask everybody should come out and they take the machine gun and sound like this . that be it . then they take just anything girl .", "we walk in the camp in Maut ... to Mauthausen , a hundred people there . I think that be be the last transport , where they bring hungarian jewish people to Mauthausen , and we have see there , you know , when we get out and stand in line , we have see a lot of dead people where you come in to go in , they be already transfer from one place to another for week and week and week , and and then they choose some people to help uh take they to gather , to gather the clothes and what be leave over in the wagon , and I get one of the two uh choice -lrb- ph -rrb- , and I help just clean up the the wagon and then we put everything in such a a what people in the two wheel like wagon but we ... they ... instead horse , we pull it into the lager and the camp close with the what you have bringe back from from Hungary where they take they in the wagon , and then when I arrive in Mauthausen , when I arrive in Mauthausen ... I do not remember exactly the time ... I have see and we look in in in the lager , I have see in one side woman and one side man . and everybody be naked and then they cut we of the hair and they leave ... they leave a line in the head , they leave a line in the head ... be like to be recognize , you know . we be prisoner . uh we be con ... uh you know , camp people .", "uh tell I when you arrive into the camp , where be you take and what do you do ? a : I be take , we be take to a block , I do not know exactly where . we then be ask to undress completely . naked . I have some photograph of my family which be tear to shred .", "a : I be take , we be take to a block , I do not know exactly where . we then be ask to undress completely . naked . I have some photograph of my family which be tear to shred . hair be completely shave .", "for you information I have it plasmically remove uh in London . not because I do not want to remember but because I do not always wish to talk about it , or to talk about it perhaps in a interview such as this where it have meaning and it have a realistic archival uh value for the future . Alright so we be strip and the hair be shaven and the number be tattoo and we be give clothing of uh dead prison ... uh russian prisoner of war and take to some block and that be the beginning of two year . Q : tell I , who be ... a : I have no idea .", "you can imagine what that menorah mean when my husband kindle the light and we see we grandchild reflect in that ... it be truly . uh so you know , that be possible under Frau Keegler and one of the thing that we do be Yelda and I dress as grandmother and you know , under the loom which we work there be sort of a white powdery substance . we put it on we hair to grey and uh and we have a performance between the bunk under one naked electric light and see the face in the bunk , you know . what we do be we start out with uh you know there be two grandmother and everything , and come to the and say oh . that be how how it start out and then we of course predict a brilliant future for everyone and then we two granddaughter come to listen to we .", "and we have to wait for the next day . 02:07:11 but in the , then , they start to search we . we have to , we have to undress complete naked ; and they search for valuable , and they , they say ... . First of all , my sister give everything away for safekeep ; because the neighbor all come in before we , go to the ghetto , and they promise that they will , they will give she back after we , we come back . but we know it do not matter who get it ; so the neighbor -- she give everything away for the neighbor .", "but we know it do not matter who get it ; so the neighbor -- she give everything away for the neighbor . and my mother , just a pair of earring she have put into a cake of soap , hope , you know ; she push in a , in cake of soap , and she hope that this will somehow help we in the in the long run , because everything else be take away from we . but be the worst be that they have , that we have to undress and be search . they , they , they search -- they poke with , with a stick they poke in , in the vagina to see whether , whether people do not , be not hide anything . and my , my mother be a religious lady ; and , and first , that hurt I mostly , that she have to go through such , such a terrible ordeal .", "because she know , she know that my sister will suffer when she will find out where she take she grandson . and then I have a double challenge to keep my sister alive , because my sister eventually -- we -- there be not too long before we find out the truth -- where we be , and what be happen . because when they , they take we to a big room where we have to , where we have to undress and there be , and they take everything away from we . and just on the other side be the same big room , only that it have gas -- only gas be come out . this be where my mother and all the other be , in that gas chamber .", "and just on the other side be the same big room , only that it have gas -- only gas be come out . this be where my mother and all the other be , in that gas chamber . and we , be in another place that we have to undress and dress and they take everything away from we . and they shove we in to , to the shower , that we have to -- but what they do be , they first open the hot water so we get scald and then they open the cold water ; so as we , be run out , we , we , be we , be beat with the , with the whip to go under it . and then when we come out we , be all so -- and first they shave we .", "because if , if we would have be sel -- to be select , they would select we to the gas chamber because we , be already not in very good shape . so one , one day , they take we to those you know , to , to have we clothes disinfect . so they take , they take we to , to disinfect the clothes , and so we have to undress naked and wait for we clothes to be disinfect . and the ss be wait there with we , you know , with the dog . we , be surround by ss and the dog .", "you see I work with this ... this firm , schallhorn.and they be do the bridge you know and the planning you know from the ... and then in ' 40 ... 1943 , they make concentration camp . 'til ' 43 , it be the work camp . and then they come in one day , everybody have to strip they clothes . it be the winter , January . about two or three foot snow , frost .", "they take we in one barrack . take off all the clothes . we have to run to the other barracks , naked in this snow and freezing cold . and they give we they stripey uniform . I be sure you have hear from they , uniform what we be wear .", "and then we be put into separate room and we be ... I do not know what happen exactly to my mother and my brother . I know they be beat . I know I be strip completely and a little ... little beaten . and ... uh ... then I be ... we be release and we be think now we be on we way to Dachau . and I can not explain it but somehow they give we a opportunity to escape and we run and we escape .", "the next day they be carry out in one coffin ... one coffin , and there be a a team -lrb- ph -rrb- which do not do anything else but the whole day they they they carry the dead people out and uh and as I say , by November I guess one third of the people have die , and new people come in . uh at this time , before this happen , I be once order to go by truck to the station ... now I do not know whether whether Lauerhutte have a station or whether it be , to a station and I be sit with another buddy , with another inmate , next to the driver and in the back there be perhaps thirty or forty uh concentration camp inmate uh who have be all sick . they come from the sick bay , and when we come to the station , they have to undress naked and be push into a freight car and the reason why I and my buddy have to come along because we have to take they clothes and bring it back and they probably go to to Auschwitz to the gas , you know . we be in AuscHwitz and they go to the gas chamber . I do not know at what time we start to realize that there be gas chamber , but we do not understand this ... we identify gas chamber with crematoria and I think since we be people from ... come from the west , the knowledge of what really happen be give to we by Jews from Poland and from the I remember there be a group of Jews from , and they know what happen , but they could not explain it either .", "frankly , nobody know about gas ... I mean now it seem strange not to know about it , but I do not think we understand it . we know about crematoria and you know , you do not follow ... develop you idea since we know what happen ... how the person kill in the crematorium ... if he burn . we do not follow the ... the crematoria , that be the place where people be kill , and we do not go further and this incident which I tell you about with people be send naked , that be clearly a case , a instance where people be send to death , but I must say it take a long time until I and I think all the other start to realize that we be condemn to dea ... to die and all pe ... all Jews be condemn to die . for some time we believe the Germans be crazy and just kill people but that everybody be to be kill , that we do not understand . now on a personal note , around this time I once come in front of a mirror , and I see what be call a mussulman .", "and they have to take everything off , everything off . everything . naked . they tell they you go in a shower room , to take a shower . you get disinfection .", "you can not believe . we see this . I be so mad when I see the people naked go on on this place to the to the to _ that camp . it be day when we come at night we could not eat . in the six week I say .", "there be thousand of prisoner come out of ... uh come into and out of the camp . so uh when they finally process we , they do not give anything to wear . we be naked , and we be only wrap in a. . . in a blanket ; and this way I live several week .", "I could have be , you know , catch many many time , you know . I do not , so maybe because ... -rsb- -lsb- nb : text in precede bracket do not appear on videotape . -rsb- photograph id photo strip -- 3 photo of prisoner in striped uniform with shave head , resemble police mug shot . leave hand photo label : `` no. 564 , KL Auschwitz . '' Photograph of six person seat around a table , circa 1942 .", "then they take I to this , to the great prison cell that be about twenty , thirty prisoner , and they tell I they they have some of they also have similar experience . and the next morning , we come for a doctor ; yes , we should be check up , and how we be healthy and so . and so we stand naked , and the nurse , which be a prisoner doctor , look at I , and he tell I , look , you have here something , hernia , you know what be . but I have it never , so I do not know what it be . and he touch it here and it take uh pain .", "so he tell something to the ss man . maybe he will give it to he , and it be O.K. and so it be . and now we be strip naked , I will remember how it be in the prisoner . this be my experience . and then , we have some , in Hamburg we could have get in one month about twenty marc , yes , from how much from friend .", "in the death sector I will explain . and they make from these two farm house gas chamber , yes . two barracck where the people take off they belongings and then they be pull to these gas chamber naked and they be poison there , yes , and from this they be pull out by ______ commander and put in the grave , in the uh , mass grave . -lrb- yes -rrb- . yes , in the mass grave .", "but I do not know , as I say , whether she be instrumental in have we neighbor murder or she boyfriend of whatever , but I remember my mother tell we not to talk loud and not to say thing so much so because it be none of that woman 's business , and I understand now why . at any rate uh the woman and she boyfriend take a trip to Paris in the year uh 1943 and uh they return on the first evening of Rosh HaShanah at which time live in we house in we flat while she be go be a family of four people ... a man , he wife and the two child , and that be the man whom I have find with my mother the day when my father disappear . that friend , he and he wife and he two child who have be pick up by the Gestapo and whom my mother have help to liberate , somehow spring from they initial confinement and who have no place to go ... one of the thing that happen when the Gestapo take you be that they also come in and strip the house and take all you effect and uh so they have no place to live and they come and stay with we . after all the woman be not there and she boyfriend and I do not think anyone know they be come back and so ... but they ... it be right ... I remember it be Rosh HaShanah evening and the woman and she boyfriend come back and they have be in Paris and they bring we a gift and I remember the gift that my brother get be a little wind-up car that would not fall off the edge of the table when it , you know , they be common now but we would never see anything like that , so anyway uh we go to bed that night . I do not know how my mother must have feel .", "it must have be a factory and they tell we to get undressed . and they would make you take off the jewelry and everything , any valuable that you have on you . they undress -- they tell we to get undressed . we all do . the woman remain with the underwear only , and the man in they shorts .", "the sun be shine . the sky be blue . and so many people stand naked in that line wait to be kill . and my mother be look around and she see this tall Gestapo man . very , very tall .", "part of you life you lose . it be just a lot of anger . anger to the world for do such thing , and not to feel when all of we have to stand naked -- such inhumanity . we be just make to feel like animal . and the beating that one constantly have to go through there , all the people .", "in those day there be no more tire that have air in they . so we make tire out of old car tire . we cut strip of old car tire . but , of course , this be solid . it be like drive on wood you know .", "you could not even stand . you be just press like sardine . so the bread and the marmalade when the people have it in they hand , it be still in they hand because when they get to destination in Treblinka , they have to undress and they have to leave everything . so the same bread and the same marmalade come back for the new transport . and this go on constantly .", "there be snow and they drag we out and put we to the track in the middle of the night to clean ... clean the snow from the track . and then they ... we have a little jewish hospital where we use to go there . so they use to take ... some pick up ... some most beautiful lady , they pick they up , bring they to the hospital there , rape they and undress they and make fool out of they , and then they release they . that be fine . that be no ... not as bad then .", "`` at the end of we runway be the biggest God dam barrel -lrb- you will have to censor that -rrb- I have see and it stink . '' `` I will be right down . '' -lrb- laughter -rrb- I put my trailer on my jeep , and I go to the air strip and we unloaded what be a enormous barrel . you think of a barrel as this big . it be three time that big .", "it be beautiful . many many year ago of course ... pardon I ... I get a job in the beginning . first I work in a motel on Sunset Strip for a while and then uh my brother have a good friend here and he have a shop with optical instrument and I get a job there and I work there for a few year work for he and settle down and my wife then have a job also . she work uh on the Sunset Strip also in a knit shop . she be uh handwork ... she inherit from she ... she father be a great tailor and Marsha inherit that obviously from she dad and she be great with she hand .", "many many year ago of course ... pardon I ... I get a job in the beginning . first I work in a motel on Sunset Strip for a while and then uh my brother have a good friend here and he have a shop with optical instrument and I get a job there and I work there for a few year work for he and settle down and my wife then have a job also . she work uh on the Sunset Strip also in a knit shop . she be uh handwork ... she inherit from she ... she father be a great tailor and Marsha inherit that obviously from she dad and she be great with she hand . she be uh ... those time , those day I mean they be embroider sweater , you know , in mode and then she be work for this girl Suzie , name Suzie , on the Strip .", "she work uh on the Sunset Strip also in a knit shop . she be uh handwork ... she inherit from she ... she father be a great tailor and Marsha inherit that obviously from she dad and she be great with she hand . she be uh ... those time , those day I mean they be embroider sweater , you know , in mode and then she be work for this girl Suzie , name Suzie , on the Strip . she have a famous shop and she work for they . she meet a lot of movie star there too .", "the officer have everything and what I do be , they ... I say I want you to get those guy drunk , as drunk as you can . I have six russian soldier , seven because we can only get seven wait on the side ... I know approximately the size of the officer because they come to visit very often , and they send I seven of they ... I get they so drunk they could not move . we undress they . we put the polish uniform on the russian soldier . they take , they steal six horse .", "and I meet a family friend there , which probably be my best -- that be probably my most important moment to survive . there be a couple of other , but when we leave the Umschlagplatz where we get out of the boxcar we be take into a barracks . I remember we be stark naked . men only . and they be tattoo we .", "now what they do ... I be a fugitive so they put I in the attic . I remember the attic be like a thin attic . it be about maybe five foot high and it be so hot and I be completely strip naked and I be just fainting and sometimes I take a rag in my own urine and I put it over my head to cool off . it be unbearable and they ... they must have be fear for they safety and they come up . they say you have to leave because we be afraid to keep you here any longer , so I get dress and I put my arm band and I go ... take the streetcar to my hometown where my brother be lay there .", "of course I get hit . what they do , they dehumanize you . what they do they keep you stark naked without any service or without any food . I do not know whether it be twenty-four hour or forty-eight hour ... I can not tell , but at that time we get dehumanize by stand naked without any facility , without any food , wall to wall . I remember that because that be a quite a quite a bad experience .", "what they do , they dehumanize you . what they do they keep you stark naked without any service or without any food . I do not know whether it be twenty-four hour or forty-eight hour ... I can not tell , but at that time we get dehumanize by stand naked without any facility , without any food , wall to wall . I remember that because that be a quite a quite a bad experience . that be just ... prison camp name be Blechhammer .", "01:50 : Auschwitz . the ss come in . we all get strip naked and we all get tattoo . completely naked . men , woman separate of course .", "the ss come in . we all get strip naked and we all get tattoo . completely naked . men , woman separate of course . the be tattoo ... it be not the pain .", "that be a. . . quite a shock for all of we , especially ... we have the woman 's camp and the man 's camp separate , and I understand there be much more of a shock for for young woman stand in front of the ss completely strip naked . after ... well , after we build the factory I stay with that for quite a while and I say well , then I I count some some german who who be send from the factory to run the the building of the of this factory and certain specification and I remember I be sit in the corner and I be at that time welding pipe . I would ... the the master would ... call he master ... he be overhead .", "next night go thirty of we and load potato , sneak out one by one , so the Germans notice that the heap get to be smaller , so one night I open the door and they plant ss and they catch I . I get beat on the ... by the ss Wacht Stube , then come into the camp on the big appell . I get on my naked behind beaten twenty-five with the bullwhip . the first three , the man hit you as hard as a man can hit you . the first three whip ... that be all you feel .", "to a certain extent you be just like punchy . you do not care and you ... you be just not a human being . you be strip from everything and it be just ... you be not think much more than just ... you you have a pain in you stomach and you be cold . I remember lay and dream if I would ever be a free man , all I want to have be a hot glass of tea with a big loaf of bread , cut very thick slice , and I would just drink the hot tea and eat the bread , one by one . that be my biggest dream .", "there be hanging daily , and I could smell the burned flesh . they have ... when you get up in the morning , you go to the wash barracks . they would take all the corpse , un ... undress they and they be lay down like a collection in the wash barrack and they would take the number here , tattoo it big letter across the chest so they can check they out . when you get up in the morning , you go to the wash barrack , you step over some corpse and you wash you face and they have like a big row , just one faucet and a urn like to wash , and because the crematoria be too small , they would ... down the hill they would burn it completely , and the stench of burn flesh be always in the air . you would smell it completely .", "bei laufen . next day the Americans come into town and the farmer take I back in and they bring I to the Americans . now , anybody who do not live through be eat alive by lice will not understand that but when I come to the American , they undress I and they throw DDT and like the whole world stand still . I must go back , because when I come to the farmer , they take my ... my striped jacket out ... off , and they give I some ... some of they civilian clothes and they bury it ' it _ be so infested with lice , but I remember when they put I back I on the wagon to carry I to the Americans , I take like a visual picture of the farm because when I be lib ... liberate later on I come back and i. . .", "the only time we get the louse be at Dachau . they take away all we civilian clothes we have . they give we strip clothes because in Landsberg we be still in civilian clothes . they take some of the kid . they put I in the front soldier .", "we walk from Auschwitz to Birkenau . we do not go on train , we walk to there . that be in the evening , and they say everybody to undress you be go in for shower . they give you soap and they give you towel . the first group go in before we and we be next to go in and we be go into the crematorium .", "I never search they . one Sunday morning they have a inspection and they come in and they find potato in the box and vegetable . what happen , they get everybody out that be in November , we get everybody out completely naked undressed . he make they crawl on the ground like snake the whole day and the whole night . he come over to I and he take out he gun and I think he be go to kill I already .", "and uh the picture of a selection . have go through that uh once in you lifetime and you will never forget it . uh the uh infamous uh Dr. Mengele , he would stand at the head of the uh column of the procession of uh naked people and uh some way before reach , uh come up in front of Mengele , we see that uh there be left and there be right and uh what he be do be he would uh people would march up in front of he and uh he would look at they and whether they be still able body or not , able to contribute uh toward the work , to the labor in the factory . so uh when my turn come , and somebody be whisper to I uh to the right , and somehow I uh manage to stay in that right lane without be uh motion back to the left lane . that be what uh make the difference of life and death .", "the truck just take off and they uh they beat she down to the ground , my mother and uh could do nothing and uh I can imagine uh after the war for all these year to have to live with such memory , what it mean to uh to or to my father for that matter , that he could not uh that he could not protect my brother and that the uh guilt feeling , uh he feel that uh he have uh take my brother with he rather than have send he with I uh and that in turn may make he feel guilty if uh if I be able to survive and uh if he have let my older brother go together with I that he maybe he would have survive too . but that be the decision at that time , that uh he though he would be able to jump the train . -lrb- pause -rrb- up to uh up to a certain point yes , uh my parent be able to uh when they still have uh they have money and uh where they connection be able to uh do something for they , but when you reach uh Auschwitz , we be strip uh of we belongings and uh reduce to uh to object that they could do with uh whatever they want . -lrb- pause -rrb- you ask yourself uh how be it possible and uh -lrb- pause -rrb- to this day when I uh after have uh read and try to understand uh that whole episode of human history , how be it possible in the 20th century for a thing like this to happen and uh there be contradictory feeling and uh -lrb- pause -rrb- to try to explain rationally - there be no explanation . to try to say that uh -lrb- pause -rrb- once the people be tell uh that this be the policy of the government and uh therefore the lower echelon would accept it and go and follow through .", "they take the last hundred and take they away to be kill . and it take we ... he save we life and that ... this be a scene I will never forget . and they ... they take the people on the ninth fort ... they be ... they put in bunker and hear at that time tell ... they strip until the underwear and they walk out a hundred at a time they be machine gun for 3 day and then they cover they up with dirt . for 3 day the grave be move up and down . they take tractor and run over the grave in order to squeeze out the last breath .", "and we hug . the last time I ever see she . they take at night to the ... all the man ... they take we to the ... unclothe ... they take we to the ... uh ... the place where they keep we all night long , all naked . take all the clothes off , and we have to go in a. . .", "I think it be the end of of we all then . I be fifteen year old , and I be all alone in this hell . 01:30:36 they tell we when we come in , they tell we to undress and that we be go to be shower and that they be go to give we clothes . the place be so cold . it ... it ... it be in early winter ; and um it ... in Birkenau , this ... which be Poland , it be freezing cold .", "I feel like I be not a human person anymore . they have shave we head ; and I feel so ashamed . and also when they tell we to undress and to shower , they make we feel like ... like we be animal . the man be walk around , and laughing and look at we . and you take a young girl at that age , who be never be expose to um a person ... to a man , and you stay there naked ... I want the ground should open , -lrb- cry -rrb- and I should go in it .", "and also when they tell we to undress and to shower , they make we feel like ... like we be animal . the man be walk around , and laughing and look at we . and you take a young girl at that age , who be never be expose to um a person ... to a man , and you stay there naked ... I want the ground should open , -lrb- cry -rrb- and I should go in it . -lrb- pause - cry -rrb- it take I many many year for I to get over this . my husband always wonder why I would go into the bathroom and get undressed , and come out in my nightgown .", "and I never tell he why , except recently . it take all these year to tell he why . because I could never see anybody stare at I while I be naked . and I think that be what it be . because it be a just ... it be just terrible for I , what we have to go through at that age .", "we do not know that this will happen , but this be what it be . the jew ... the and the Jews be down ... be take down to the Danube River . the Danube river be frozen maybe ... I do not know how many inch thick , but they ... they throw some ... uh ... material , some military bomb or something into the water , probe the ... uh ... the thing open ... ice , the ice open and take the people into a place where they have to undress and naked to go on the trampoline which be over the Danube River , and they be shoot into the river . they be shoot and fall into the river . now , this go on for a long time .", "all of they be whip . and they tell we right away to line up and to get undressed . naked ! you know , one , you be only a person as soon ... as long as you have you clothes on . you can be a professor .", "you can be a scientist . you can be a shoemaker . but as long ... as soon as you clothes come up and you stand naked , you be lose . you be not a humanbee anymore . this be what I can not ... what I can not forgive the german that they ... they take off we ... systematically take ... take away we dignity .", "you be not a humanbee anymore . this be what I can not ... what I can not forgive the german that they ... they take off we ... systematically take ... take away we dignity . but undress we , many of the girl be young girl . they be virgin . they never see they parent naked , never see they mother naked , but all of a sudden we ... we have to go and get undressed .", "but undress we , many of the girl be young girl . they be virgin . they never see they parent naked , never see they mother naked , but all of a sudden we ... we have to go and get undressed . we be take to ... to the ... to someplace . they say that they be take out we to bath , to a general bath , a general bath .", "we be suffer of that dirt . everything be lice be crawl about people on the street . you could have see not ... not with the naked eye . you could have see more lice on the people than you could have see the clawing . all this be in preparation to give we a slow death .", "uh ... later on , later on I find out ... uh ... that ... uh ... you know , when you begin to question why and that be so we would not have we period . and ... uh ... that be another story beside that . so anyways , this be ... uh ... and then they give we a strip dress and clog , ... uh ... wooden clog . and ... uh ... then they give we a rusty tin can that look like full of rust for we food and they say that be ... we have to hold on because we life depend on that , but if we lose that we would get nothing . and ... uh ... then we be assign a barrack , and there be no room .", "the Nazis try to stop -- they try to interfere and cause static so they make we weave . we be tell that what it be -- I be not a hundred percent sure . they make we weave plastic -- braid plastic strip and they be go to drop this , hope that that would interfere with the radar transmission . they be drop this from plane and we be force to keep plait these thing in the Weberei . this be one of the job in the Weberei and we work there for a while .", "right , the belt . while I -- while we be in -- work in Kanada we be not allow to wear what be really -- would be consider civilian clothes . while , the people in camp , in the camp , be not give these strip clothes , not all of they , they be wear strip clothes . they be give the old rag clothes that be take off the body , and give to they and they last until they really fall off and they be full of mud and filth and lice . and then every so often they , they would -- the lice -- the clothes be take away and they be put in the gas chamber to kill the lice , and then of course all the nit be dead but they be all sit in the seam and be still there .", "a : oh gosh , the shoe . everyone be give shoe in regulation , these clog . they be just , you know , wooden sole and little canvas strip to hold , to put the foot in . the earth in Auschwitz be very muddy . it have be I understand no man 's land between the war and there be fish hatchery and it be very wet and humid .", "there be a big sink where we wash ourselves and then you can go toilet there and there be a guy and he have those high boot . a guy ... he be just a short for one week . he have 01:48 : those high , high boot and then Walter look at those boot and he say my gosh , I know ... I be shoemaker ... I know this ... in those boot , you know , there be strip of metal , of good steel . he say maybe we can make a saw out of this . so Walter go and talk to he ... how long you be here .", "and Gross Rosen be a camp , I at least do not see any bed . it be a transit camp of five day be the most that they would let you stay in that camp . they complete undress you . you could not have nothing that belong to you . they make you spread you you leg and and check , cut off you hair .", "uh I get permission , a pass , to visit the crematorium and into the camp . I be amaze . in contrast to the Waldenburg group , all I see be live skeleton -- gaunt people , many of they completely naked . uh many of they , you could not tell whether they be walk dead or walk alive . they face be expressionless .", "nothing there , no '' blanket or nothing . some of they sleep on the ... on the brick . then about 4:00 in the morning , we have to get up and stand naked even in the winter to see if we have a clear skin . there they count we in 5 , a hundred in a group , and the ss with the dog take we to work . we have to walk , let 's say , maybe 10 mile a day to work .", "well , they beat they up in the office . I have a girl what she be a secretary there and she tell they this . stripped they naked , and they beat they up with that ... how do you call it ? uh ... Q : A whip ?", "some do . some can not . people stand by ... by every day in Auschwitz , you have to go up 4 o'clock in the morning , stand in the line , shiver cold , strip until naked . that be to look for a little thing on the skin . which we do not have even water or anything for 7 month .", "we want to work . why do you do to we ? '' Start to beat they up and stand naked and nothing ... nothing then . how ... how can you fight back ? so they push they in the crematorium with the family .", "how do you get from England to Paris ? what be the circumstance ? answer : well , from England to Paris , uh I be uh fly over in a small plane together with a number of other officer , and we land on a air strip in Normandy . the uh german troops and uh I tell you be not that far away , and indeed as we plane land on the air strip in Normandy uh Ger ... german artillery begin shell the air strip . we be ask to uh leave the plane as quickly as possible and to run for cover , and uh of course I follow order very quickly .", "what be the circumstance ? answer : well , from England to Paris , uh I be uh fly over in a small plane together with a number of other officer , and we land on a air strip in Normandy . the uh german troops and uh I tell you be not that far away , and indeed as we plane land on the air strip in Normandy uh Ger ... german artillery begin shell the air strip . we be ask to uh leave the plane as quickly as possible and to run for cover , and uh of course I follow order very quickly . and uh in the process I lose a brand new officer 's trench coat that I have just purchase in London before departure for France .", "that be to say we cross the pass . my parent , not everyone but at random , people be take out of the plane ... out of the train and uh some of they be even uh bodily examine . now my mother be take into one room and my father in another , totally strip and totally examine and my mother can -- and I be leave with the Meyers on the train . for some reason the Meyers be not examine . as I say , people be take at random .", "uh but the situation become such that uh they would come eight or ten time a day to bomb . I mean you could not go to bed . you could not undress . there be week we would not undress because in the middle of the night you would have to run several time . uh it become such that you could not dare uh undress yourself to even wash yourself in the basin in you room because they would come to bomb .", "I mean you could not go to bed . you could not undress . there be week we would not undress because in the middle of the night you would have to run several time . uh it become such that you could not dare uh undress yourself to even wash yourself in the basin in you room because they would come to bomb . uh one day a high italian official come to the city and my mother , not be bashful , approach he in the parade and say it be impossible for we to remain here .", "you could not undress . there be week we would not undress because in the middle of the night you would have to run several time . uh it become such that you could not dare uh undress yourself to even wash yourself in the basin in you room because they would come to bomb . uh one day a high italian official come to the city and my mother , not be bashful , approach he in the parade and say it be impossible for we to remain here . I have a little child , and uh could we get permission , because here we be send here by the italian govern force , uh could I get permission to go to the next town , and the next town be call , also small town .", "they give we shower over there . of course , they cut we hair . Cut everything , you know , undress completely , cut everything . go under the shower and then they give we a new number because the Auschwitz number , the tattoo number be no good for Buchenwald . so , they give we a new number , and we have to go by the number now because nobody have a name .", "only the other people be the same way , they do to the other people the same thing . we be hide . I see on the way the supply landing strip , with truck , with food burning . we be run to the truck to see if maybe there be some kind of a food leftover , which do not burn . when you run to the truck , the Germans kill you .", "that the transport come . they kill the people . you see they run naked . and then you ... you sort out they belongings . but there be other thing that happen every day .", "and that building with the chalk kind of interested I because sometimes I would hear scream and I would see german soldier take woman there , woman that be maybe at that time maybe in they twenty or maybe older . they be develop a lot better . they be pretty woman and apparently they make some medical experiment , because through one window we peek and we see some man naked in big tub . they be metal tub , with ice and they would freeze they to a certain temperature and they would let the woman undress and I guess they want to see the sexual reaction and this be horrible to watch and pretty soon it be the turn for we . -lrb- pause -rrb- -lrb- cry -rrb- this be when you .", "they be develop a lot better . they be pretty woman and apparently they make some medical experiment , because through one window we peek and we see some man naked in big tub . they be metal tub , with ice and they would freeze they to a certain temperature and they would let the woman undress and I guess they want to see the sexual reaction and this be horrible to watch and pretty soon it be the turn for we . -lrb- pause -rrb- -lrb- cry -rrb- this be when you . -lrb- pause -rrb- and if you do not do what they want you to do , you will be beat up something terrible , or you be put under cold shower .", "a few break out into the open , only to be meet by a hail of rifle fire which cut they down , they clothing still burn . the smaller number that escape have clear they way through thick roll of barb wire , tear they burning flesh in a miraculous dash to safety . the rest be shoot down and they naked char body be still there when we troops arrive . so here on the outskirts of one of Germany 's greatest city , world famous for its beautiful building , its culture , its monument to great man , '' Leipzig , that be , `` there stand a monument to a new type of german culture that the world should never forget . `` and this be write in June of 1945 .", "water we find once in a while in the forest in the little stream . we find ... it be cold . we be almost naked . no clothes . and we find blueberry , frozen blueberry .", "it so happen that they point out one of my friend . a beautiful girl . she name be Susza Fein , and they put she and they undress she and they start to look in every place if she do not conceal something . she be in this time 19 year old . and they do it so cruel that they use instrument that they cut open she belly .", "and this be a emergency door . when he run out I shoot after he , and I hit he in the spine , and he fall down . now we be naked . my brother do not know what be go on . so he start to yell to they , `` what you play with firecracker ?", "and so , more or less I figure out that I will go this way and there be a house that I know this house , and this peasant be friendly . I say , `` if we would be lucky , and if I would hit this house , we would be save . '' now imagine if peasant will see we in the middle of the winter , two people naked without shoe . well , anyway , we start to go down , so I have my two revolver . I have everything on I .", "and so we we be march under guard every day to that to that factory , about uh five mile or maybe five kilometer from the ghetto in separate group and we work . the work be hard and miserable but we work and we come back and we meet at night in the ghetto and uh hope to hear something from we parent because we believe , or at least I believe ... I have no reason not to ... that they be someplace in the Ukraine . and of course that be ... there be no suspense then and of course they all go to a destruction camp and all the people be drive naked into gas chamber and kill . after about three week of work in that factory , one day ... and we group be maybe a group of hundred people ... after about three week of work and the march every day to that factory , one day when the work , when the job be over , the official in that factory say to we you be not go back . we have build a camp uh within the factory , right outside the factory wall but kind of adjoining the factory and you be stay here tonight .", "you have to remember a bowl of watery soup with some leaf or some piece of potato in it for two people who each one of they equip with he own spoon and and this be ready make for conflict and combat and and and and uh the the spilling of soup and so on , but somehow before I arrive a a custom be develop over there where the two prisoner , skeleton-looking hungary prisoner who would be give this bowl of soup to share , would feed each other , so if you give I half a spoon , I give you half a spoon . and if you dip down and find a piece of potato , I will dip down and give you a piece of potato , and so that custom or that habit or that arrangement which have both philosophical and not religious undertone , people manage to people who be stranger , people who be die of hunger manage somehow to be discipline and to go through that daily ritual of share the bowl of soup . after six week of work and hard labor ... oh yes ... I be I be forget something ... when we first come to Flossenburg , we be march by this young ss guard with they dog up the hill to the camp , we we be bring before a very large building in a kind of assembly area , and we be ... there be four hundred and fifty of we approximately , and we be all tell to undress , to leave we clothing on the floor and all we possession and we go in to take shower . now there be concern . there be speculation , because by that time we know about gas chamber .", "we know that we parent who be who go to the to the allegedly be send to that farm in the east be really kill and send to gas chamber . we know about that , and there be great concern that we may be take to a gas chamber . this be typical ... this the thing ... undress ... go in naked . but there be really no choice . the choice be to resist and be kill , to run , to fight , to or to just hope and to do what one be tell and hope that it be true that what they say that we will take a shower .", "the choice be to resist and be kill , to run , to fight , to or to just hope and to do what one be tell and hope that it be true that what they say that we will take a shower . I do that . I leave my clothing and I leave what whatever little possession I have of my own that I carry through all the year of camp , and these possession be a little handkerchief in which I have tie photograph of my brother and my parent , and after that we be really give shower and when the shower be over , make out ... make to go out through another door where we be give new strip uniform and uh and uh wooden shoe and all those thing that we leave behind we have never see again , so I have not have a picture of my parent until I come to the United States where my aunt uh give I a picture of my parent when they be first marry . this uh ... I remember they only vaguely that way , and I have no picture of my brother . we work .", "we be in Flossenburg for about six week . work very hard and one time we be expose to a selection . uh selection be a process where everybody stand naked and the a few ss people , one of they I believe a physician , kind of go by and mark we with a green ink write number or some symbol on we forehead and he do it to I too . I do not know what it mean and we do not know or we do not care anyway . do not know , do not care , but that night again we group be assemble , put on a train ... that group of four hundred and fifty .", "we have wooden shoe and we march make a tremendous clatter on the street . it be early in the morning and as we be be march people be , who be go to work , civilian , be stop . the trolley car be stop and people be stop to let we pass , a column of a few hundred people in strip uniform . -lrb- cry -rrb- and the people cry . -lrb- cry -rrb- for the first time I see support .", "he might have be a sr man , but I seem to remember he be a soldier . -lrb- Clearing throat -rrb- sorry . and he have a rifle there with a bayonet , a naked bayonet plant in ... uh ... the ... uh ... what you call that ? ... the ... uh ... on top of the rifle plant there . and as we come in , he jump mother and he see a woman with ... with a child there and he immediately decide we be jewish and he shoot at something like .", "we have to go through the shower . they shave we head in case somebody will run away they should find -lsb- she -rsb- , they should know that we be the Jews from the concentration camp , recognize we . they give we strip clothes with number . from then on we never be call by the name , only by the number . then they put we in barracks .", "they , it would be much easier for they and they provide special blue bus . at that time we do not know what be happen to they , but they be chase through certain 01:15:30 section of town into the forest , a place call Rumbola and there russian prisoner of war have prepare large grave , mass grave , and when the people get there they be tell to undress , put they shoe in one pile they shoe in one pile , clothing in another pile , drive to the edge of this mass grave , and machine-gunned . it be go on all night and the next day . fifteen thousand of we people be massacre in that particular day .", "perhaps , perhaps the Russians will be liberating we before the german have a chance to kill we . in the meantime , periodically the Germans would come into we camp , line everybody up in front of a table where one of the Germans would sit . everybody have to undress naked and walk in front of he , and if there be something he would like on you body , any scar or anything like that , you go to the left , and leave mean certain death . and my father who be a invalid and who be with we at that time yet still on many occasion he would have be doom if he would not have somehow we be able to save he by not let he go into the line , by sneak he out . when once I remember my father be take out and and send to the left , and he be still stand there and wait the truck to take he away , and the german guard be walk back and forth , and as he turn he back I snuck in .", "answer -lrb- Adam -rrb- : now , you see , again on one of my trip when I be go over , you know , on the other side of Warsaw ghetto ... I be catch without my ... without the armband near the wall , near the wall by a Gestapo , by ss man . they arrest I , of course , and take I to the headquarters of the Gestapo in Warsaw which be outside of the Warsaw ghetto , in the polish sectioned area ... in the polish section . and uh they be very rude and uh , of course , after interrogation they take I to a room which be about eight by eight and the wall be full of fresh blood , red wall , and then they have uh wooden bench on the floor and into on top be break piece of glass cement into these bench and they , they use to force you to undress and beat you to death on those piece of broken glass . he say to I , you be go to undress and lay down on this . I say oh no .", "they arrest I , of course , and take I to the headquarters of the Gestapo in Warsaw which be outside of the Warsaw ghetto , in the polish sectioned area ... in the polish section . and uh they be very rude and uh , of course , after interrogation they take I to a room which be about eight by eight and the wall be full of fresh blood , red wall , and then they have uh wooden bench on the floor and into on top be break piece of glass cement into these bench and they , they use to force you to undress and beat you to death on those piece of broken glass . he say to I , you be go to undress and lay down on this . I say oh no . I know ... why should i. .", "I have no chance ... you know I do not have any chance . I have no ar ... no gun . I could not help myself , but I say no , I will not undress . if you want you try . I feel that if he would try to undress I , I would start , you know , hit he and then he will just kill I at once and that be it , but uh I do not and he say to I , ok .", "I could not help myself , but I say no , I will not undress . if you want you try . I feel that if he would try to undress I , I would start , you know , hit he and then he will just kill I at once and that be it , but uh I do not and he say to I , ok . we just want to scare you . tomorrow we finish you .", "so a lot of people have clothes . and they come to I . I do not have ... I come home naked like my mother have I when I be bear . I be 2 week without . I go out in a blanket .", "they take they to the crematorium , but they do not have room for they . every 4 week they make selection . Mengele come in , and we have to strip all we clothes . we be naked . we have to pick up one hand and ... uh ... to ... go through .", "every 4 week they make selection . Mengele come in , and we have to strip all we clothes . we be naked . we have to pick up one hand and ... uh ... to ... go through . .", "so he tell I , `` Toby , I go ask the man . you know , mother , grandmother to child come to take bath too . '' so I say , `` you be naked . how could you go talk to a man . '' I be embarrass to go .", "so none of that change . there be no change . uh what you carry with you , unless you be totally degrade ... uh what happen in concentration camp where you be absolutely strip of everything , of dignity , but as long as you can keep you dignity , the fact that you be poor and you do not have clothing and that you have to be careful and so forth , do not matter . absolutely do not matter . you can carry you human dignity whether you be in a slum or whether you be in a plush , plush castle , or vice versa .", "they take my father 's wooden leg off and search it for money , contraband . but we know better than that , because by that time we already have learn we lesson . uh ... they take and strip my mother , totally naked , and check in place you would not dream of checking , and they take my little sister who at that time be a 8 year old kid , and strip she . I do not know exactly how much they check she , but I know my mother tell I that she be totally and utterly check . and then they put we back together again , we luggage and so forth , and we get to Italy .", ". with , you know , like tut , tut , tut , tut , tut , like this . and we do have to undress ourselves . in one mountain be the ... the ... the clothes , the ... the coat , and one mountain be the shoe , and one mountain be jewelry . there be a box with jewelry .", "do you have bla , bla , bla . '' and if you do not give it to they , then they search and that be worse . and then I be stand then in the front and he tell I to undress . to undress naked . naked !", "and if you do not give it to they , then they search and that be worse . and then I be stand then in the front and he tell I to undress . to undress naked . naked ! and you know , I do not want to do it , but my mother speak in latvian to I , `` do it .", "and then I be stand then in the front and he tell I to undress . to undress naked . naked ! and you know , I do not want to do it , but my mother speak in latvian to I , `` do it . do it . ''", "and you know , I do not want to do it , but my mother speak in latvian to I , `` do it . do it . '' she stay in back of I and she say , `` undress , '' in latvian to I . and I undress . I be just in my panties .", "do it . '' she stay in back of I and she say , `` undress , '' in latvian to I . and I undress . I be just in my panties . and he tell I to take a chair and to get up on the stove .", "-- `` all Jews out fast , fast ! '' with a beating . and we have see , among the ss , people in striped uniform , prisoner strip uniform . and these be the boy that work the railroad track . of course we do not know why .", "they shove we into the huge brick building , and there be prisoner and ss tell we what to do next . there be table , long table . the first area we have to undress , strip we clothing . there be hook behind we . you put the clothing through a piece of wire , hang the clothing up .", "they give we , issue we a striped brown cap , a jacket , a striped jacket , a pair of striped trousers , a pair of wooden clog , and a shirt . no sock or underwear . then the last area , when they give we the uniform , they give we two strip of cloth . the cloth I would say be about six inch long , maybe inch and a half wide . and it would star , star with the star of David , correspond with the number on you left forearm , sew on you left breast and on the right pant leg .", "the last one be Fisher , who die uh last year . and without a partner you could not survive . after we finish a day 's work at Canada Kommando , you just could not go home , back to the camp , without be search , first at the work site - line up , strip naked in most case . and if you be not strip naked , you pants drop because they know that some of we carry money in the place that be , uh , kind of dark . uh , but we do , we also know how to smuggle out , smuggle the stuff in .", "and without a partner you could not survive . after we finish a day 's work at Canada Kommando , you just could not go home , back to the camp , without be search , first at the work site - line up , strip naked in most case . and if you be not strip naked , you pants drop because they know that some of we carry money in the place that be , uh , kind of dark . uh , but we do , we also know how to smuggle out , smuggle the stuff in . for instance , you in this row , and you friend be in the row in front of you .", "ok . here on this end , I be one of the person unload the belongings of hungarian jew that be bring there , May 1944 , that already be gas . this come from the zunda -lrb- ph -rrb- , from the gas chamber , from the undress room . this photo , by the way , be give to I by historian , czech historian , czechoslovakian historian , jewish man . he name be Erich Kulka .", "of course , we do not know when the selection would be . but all of a sudden , in most case on a Sundays , cause everyone be in , in the camp . the whole camp be take out to Appellplatz , to roll call place , line up in row of five , strip naked , and you clothing be drop by you in front of you foot . and Mengele , with the , with the Lager ... Lager\u00e4ltester , who be a prisoner , and the Lagerf\u00fchrer , and also the commandant ; they would go from barrack to barrack , block to block . and behind Mengele be a prisoner registrar -- a Schreiber what they call -- and as Mengele would , this be how , how it would be .", "so then he take away the gun from my nose and he take off the the belly and tell I stand up . and I stand up so that ... take off you clothes . entirely naked I stand and then they could see that I be a jew and then he tell I if you escape from Kovno from the Nazis , what be you do here ? we already liberate Kovno five day . so I say ... I could see that they be very top up top officer of the army , but he look to I like a jew but he do not disclose a word about he jewishness , so he say , why do not you go back to Kovno .", "Q : be that right ? a : I never see a battle at night and I better explain that why . because to drive the tank you get to have some kind of uh , some light or something ... I mean you can not just go down without something on and if you show ... there be a little strip of light , and if you would show a strip of light , you would be shoot at . so that always bewilder I about people say they fight . now I be out on patrol at night .", "not the same dress , but the same material , and they hair be beautiful , long . young woman , very , very attractive woman . and they have a book , and they put we name in and then they give we tatoo and then we be with they go into a circle of soldier with big dog and then we have to take off we clothes , strip . the one who strip I , help I strip , take at the same time my wedding band off my finger . I have forget I have it .", "young woman , very , very attractive woman . and they have a book , and they put we name in and then they give we tatoo and then we be with they go into a circle of soldier with big dog and then we have to take off we clothes , strip . the one who strip I , help I strip , take at the same time my wedding band off my finger . I have forget I have it . maybe I would have try to put it in my mouth or whatever .", "I do not remember the other one , but one girl she be german . when I get out from there , he be stand right there . we be naked . can you imagine how a person feel , especially a woman , in front ... no matter how ... how bad the situation be , whatever ... I mean we practically lose we mind at ... at moment like that . but still the fact that we be naked in front of a man whoever it may have be , it be devastate and especially for a teenager that be modest .", "we be naked . can you imagine how a person feel , especially a woman , in front ... no matter how ... how bad the situation be , whatever ... I mean we practically lose we mind at ... at moment like that . but still the fact that we be naked in front of a man whoever it may have be , it be devastate and especially for a teenager that be modest . and when I see that i. . .", "uh , but , uh , railroad work be probably among the hardest work that we ever do because people be not strong enough to lift up the rail , and uh , some people get crush under the rail , and people fall down . we clothing be uh , uh , limit . in the wintertime we have clog on , we have shoe with wooden sole , blue/white strip uniform . in the beginning we have we own with the star of David on it . later on we get the blue/white-striped uniform .", "some of we might be shoot in the process of escape , if it be find out , but some of we might get through . so it always better in a group , then split up once you be outside . O.K. Uh , we have at that time plan if we get away from the factory , but then be , once you get , we have blue/white strip uniform , and what , what do you do when you escape . you be in the middle of Germany or some place or polish border or something . my idea be to get to my german friend , this catholic family by the name of sonnon -lrb- ph -rrb- in muchenglablak -lrb- ph -rrb- , whose parent be friend of my parent , to get to the house and then to survive the war in they cellar .", "but then the question be , once you escape , a tattooed number on the arm and uh hair shear . in other word , you look like a prisoner . and blue/white strip uniform that you could throw away if you have other clothes , but you still look like a prisoner with no hair and look like a skeleton , you be immediately recognize , so where you go to go . so even if you have a chance to escape , and the chance be there frankly , at the place of work , in , in the synthetic gasoline factory . there be many chance .", "at that time it would have be very easy to escape during the bombing . where to go ? hair shear off , number on the arm , and blue/white strip uniform . no place to go . no .", "First of all , it be freezing in there . uh , I be talk about the beginning of 1945 , the mid-winter , when we start there . and I ask this german engineer if he have any old clothing he could bring in that we could wear under we prisoner blue/white strip uniform and he say yes he would . and I say I have a friend too , and I say he would bring in some warm clothing . so he be one of the good guy .", "they be all about we age and they be all make it sort of , like we do , be able to stand up on they own two leg . and we say , we shall escape together . and they also have get civilian clothes like we do from some other place they be work , they be wear underneath they blue/white strip uniform . and , uh , so we say , well we will try and escape and then we go in different direction , maybe two one way , two another way , maybe one ss guard be firing , maybe he will hit some of we , maybe he will not hit anybody . but some of we will get out .", "there be nobody to touch sexually to begin with , but those year , they be animal . they do not care who they touch , they really do not . they touch I to see it my body 's naked , you know , just whatever I have on I to cover I up . they take off whatever they have on they back and they cover I , which be the truth . and I be -- they be watch I , also , same story .", "even the circumstance that we live in , we have no period . so that eliminate about how can we protect ourselves , if we do not have a period ? and they dig a long narrow strip outside , with a board across . that be we toilet , outside . and there be day when it be like 30 below zero .", "we have not have shower or bath or anything , or toilet paper , or anything . so , they chase we into a room . we be totally naked . they put up a table . it be like a fashion show table , like a runway .", "they put up a table . it be like a fashion show table , like a runway . and we have to walk naked on that table . and the ss man -- they sit on both side , and they look at we body , whether we be worthwhile saving , or be gas . I have this horrible rash , that I know I be go to be gas , because the gas be for -- the rash be from malnutrition and dirt .", "a : in Poland they do a resistance . but they do not succeed . you can not resist , when you be naked . do you know what I mean ? it be like take a person , and undress the person and say , `` fight for you life . ''", "you can not resist , when you be naked . do you know what I mean ? it be like take a person , and undress the person and say , `` fight for you life . '' with what ? there be nothing , never .", "and I enter the door , and I look . inside the room -- as I say a small room -- the Germans have erect some kind of a board upright , much like a sheet of plywood . and here , they have take a prisoner and they have strip he ; and they have nail he with spike -- common spike with the head on they -- through he elbow and through he wrist that I see . nail he like this , spread-eagled on that board . and I could see where they have take apparently a scalpel , and they have cut he throat on the side here ... he vocal cord somewhere .", "we leave half of the people dead . and other be mad . there be a woman whose child be kill and she be run naked and she do not know what be go on . and we have to run . I lose my sister , I lose my father .", "my father be separate from we when they separate man from woman . and I find myself in a room with many young woman . we be tell to undress . and I find my sister there . and this be Majdanek .", "and I find my sister there . and this be Majdanek . so we be tell to undress and leave everything behind we except we shoe , we could take we own shoe , which we do . we go through the shower . we be give some clothes .", "we be still fresh , we be okay . across from we at that time be the man 's lager . and we could see one day there be a selection of the man , which mean that the man stand in row naked and be file before the german to be move , to be destroy . at that point , I be 14 . for the first time in my life that I see a naked man .", "and we could see one day there be a selection of the man , which mean that the man stand in row naked and be file before the german to be move , to be destroy . at that point , I be 14 . for the first time in my life that I see a naked man . it be indecent , but the implication of what the selection be all about do not hit I at that time , you know , younger man , older man , different type of work . we be tell that the man lager be go to be move and that we , from the Birkenau Lager A , be go to move to Birkenau Lager B , where the man use to be .", "we be line no . we be on one side , tetrush -lrb- ph -rrb- prisoner of the administration create a cordon on the other side . we have order to undress completely and go over in front of the selecting officer . and tell to go left or right ; leave to life , right to death . and the one selection day , I be rotten from the waist down , infection , boil .", "and the one selection day , I be rotten from the waist down , infection , boil . the combination of poor diet , poor hygiene , what have you , just develop in boil . I be not go to undress . if I do , it be a death warrant . I decide I be go to undress on top but not at the bottom .", "I be not go to undress . if I do , it be a death warrant . I decide I be go to undress on top but not at the bottom . I try to go once and be push back , undress . 01:51:04 I do not .", "if I do , it be a death warrant . I decide I be go to undress on top but not at the bottom . I try to go once and be push back , undress . 01:51:04 I do not . I go again , I be certain I be go to death , I be pass to right .", "Enough this the clothes . you take the clothes off . and when I go to the right side , naked , they throw the Gestapo throw clothes to people who be to get off the left side and throw one shoe small , one piece clothes , nothing you can wear . Q . so after you get in this line , where do they take you ?", "so , you know , we live with hope that maybe we be go to live . they bring we into Maidanek . after a long , long drive they bring we into Maidanek , and they tell we to undress and to take a shower . they put we into cold shower and they take away everything . they give we old junk to put on we , and they take away all we jewelry but you see before we leave we be smarter , we put all the jewelry in the toilet .", "we be sit on it so we put everything there . we say let 's not give anything to they . but I forget that I have long hair and I forget that I have my earring with my monogram in my ear and my hair cover it , so it go through , but everything go and we be naked . the man , they take separate and they undress the man naked and they leave they only the strap in the hand and they tell they to hold the strap in they hand and they let german shepherd after they . and you know , when you have something in the hand and the german Shepherds go wild and they be bite out piece of meat of the people .", "we say let 's not give anything to they . but I forget that I have long hair and I forget that I have my earring with my monogram in my ear and my hair cover it , so it go through , but everything go and we be naked . the man , they take separate and they undress the man naked and they leave they only the strap in the hand and they tell they to hold the strap in they hand and they let german shepherd after they . and you know , when you have something in the hand and the german Shepherds go wild and they be bite out piece of meat of the people . this be the beginning of Maidanek .", "a : we be watch . the woman be separate , but the man be run . we be naked , we do not have strap . men have pants with strap so they have the strap and the german shepherd tear they apart . so , we go into the camp .", "a : less , less , it be worse . First of all they make selection every few week . they look at you naked . you have to go through naked with you clothes on you arm and they look you through like cattle and look at you tooth , exactly like cow like cattle , they be buy cow to work . so , they look we through from the front and from the back and they go around we like you know look all over you .", "First of all they make selection every few week . they look at you naked . you have to go through naked with you clothes on you arm and they look you through like cattle and look at you tooth , exactly like cow like cattle , they be buy cow to work . so , they look we through from the front and from the back and they go around we like you know look all over you . this be selection , call selection , and they select if you be still good to work they send you straight ahead and if not they take you out on the side .", "it be not civilization . it be , I think in the old age , they have a better civilization that we have . german look we over naked like piece of meat . we do not have we period time because they put something in you food that we be not woman . Q : how do you know that ?", "a : I have no idea . it be a few block . they fill up a few block and they keep we naked for about three or four week . I do not even know how long they keep we there because people use to come to we window from there and they use to see in one girl come , who she be my brother 's friend and she look at I and she think I be my other sister , , and she say be you , and I say who be you and she say it be Sophie Biaz . she be polish .", "she bring I a piece of bread into the window and she say do you know what happen to I ? she be very tall and very she have very gorgeous leg , she say you know what I do not have my cartlidge by my bone and I can only walk five or ten minute most and my foot , I do not have any feeling in my leg so she be a guinea pig there . she help I there a little and they keep we there and they feed we there naked and we be on the bed do nothing and just you know kid around and not know even what be go to bring tomorrow . we do not know . be we go to stay here , nobody know .", "we be lock in and no clothes so that be okay . we have a blanket you know like one blanket of eight and that be okay . we have a little something to cover ourselves and we be walk around naked . so , it do not bother we because we be all woman and we do not have anything to hide . we do not have anything period .", "for about three month we have to be there because people use to get sick and a lot of they die , a lot . so , we use to be in a quarantine and every Sunday people from the city learn about it and they come to we be in with big fence but people go through the fence and they talk and they ask we question and they speak very well english and german , so one couple come to the and they see I and they say we be surround around three way with water . it be a lake , and you could swim but naked . the boy find out that these girl be swim naked so they come to see we naked there and so a couple come , a young couple , she be in the forty maybe forty and she look and she say would you like to be free and go out from the quarantine , and I say of course I would . so , she say I can make you a passport and you can get out .", "so , we use to be in a quarantine and every Sunday people from the city learn about it and they come to we be in with big fence but people go through the fence and they talk and they ask we question and they speak very well english and german , so one couple come to the and they see I and they say we be surround around three way with water . it be a lake , and you could swim but naked . the boy find out that these girl be swim naked so they come to see we naked there and so a couple come , a young couple , she be in the forty maybe forty and she look and she say would you like to be free and go out from the quarantine , and I say of course I would . so , she say I can make you a passport and you can get out . I be go to be you foster mother and we can adopt you so she do .", "and when I come there I do not really know what happen . after a while a guard come and take I out and into the yard and to the shower . I have to undress and my clothes be disinfect and I have to shower . and then after the clothes come back , my suit and so on , be all trample they take I -- the guard take I to the first -- no , second floor of the prison and take I to a cell . I do not remember the number of the cell .", "he wear a yellow armband with black lettering on which be it say , - -- elderstedt , and then there be some other , you know , prisoner in striped uniform with armband . some have block elderstedt which mean block senior , and we be march to the shower . there we have to undress and we be shave all over we body include we head , and then we have to go into a tank which be full of some chemical , disinfectant , we have to submerge in it , and then from there we go to the shower and we have to wash , and when we come out of the shower , we have to put we civilian clothes , because when we come from the prison we be still in civilian clothes . we have to -- it be pack in a bag , in a paper bag with we number . of course , we do not have the number then but after the shower then we be issue prison uniform .", "we have to -- it be pack in a bag , in a paper bag with we number . of course , we do not have the number then but after the shower then we be issue prison uniform . we get long underwear , striped , you know , blue and white stripe but very , very narrow underwear , and then we receive striped , one-inch white striped , white and blue trousers and jacket and a cap , also strip . then we be issue to swatch of white cloth with a number . my number be 13390 and two red triangle .", "you could only see the foreyard , you know , to the crematorium . there be a gate and then there be a small yard and to this from we window where we be at the far end of this block . I see myself a truck arrive and back out to the gate to the small yard and Jews have to - only man - they arrive from the truck and be put into the yard and there they have to undress . now , how do I know they be Jews ? because , because they be hasidic Jews .", "they wear special dress . you know , mostly black , black hat and most of they have beard . later on , we also find out from the crematorium people who have to burn the body that there be Jews from the polish city of Bendzin , which be in Syvicia -lsb- ph -rsb- not far from Auschwitz , and these people have to undress and they disappear . I could not see that , but they all go to the gas chamber there and they be gas . now , as I work in the carpentry a time and then in the workshop you know I have to take order and the order come to I , and I have to distribute the order to the different workshop , you know whether it be a order for the locksmith or a order for the carpenter or for the glasser or for the electrician and so on .", "we know something be go on . later on , they bring maybe 100 , I do not know exactly , 100 man . now , they be strip to the waist but you could see from the trousers that they be soldier . as I say , later on we do find out that they be russian soldier . it as also after the invasion , after the June 22 , 1941 , I think it be in August , and they , they be register or question or whatever the ss - nobody .", "it be a very small one - room apartment . there be no privacy . I remember my mother basically sponge bathing in a little basin of water she would stand in and I remember see she naked in the room . I mean , there be no other place to go . so , to literally you live there , you sleep there , you cook there and so forth , but my father suddenly become a farmer .", "and the truck never arrive at the ghetto . we be tell by the ss that the truck have be take to Dunamenda -lrb- ph. -rrb- for the people to work at the canning factory . and , in fact , there be no such thing as Dunamenda and the truck be take directly into the wood which we find out only later and the people have to strip and be shoot into open mass grave . all this , of course , we find out later . meanwhile , we settle down in the house or shack that be assign to we because the ghetto be in the worse slum area of Lega .", "we be save , we be singing . and we have to go to selection , you know . so one side we carry we stuff and we be naked . in one hand , we have to be like up , and we be check if we be clean , or we do not have some wound . you know , thing like that .", "I mean this be normal to think that if you do not see anybody and you know that six people be away and you know that you be select , so you think that you will die . and those six people after they finish the grave , they see the six people who run away be bring in . those people be disrobe , be naked . the original six people be catch on the road and bring back . this nobody know at that time .", "the original six people be catch on the road and bring back . this nobody know at that time . and they make they run through the barb wire where they escape naked . there be four woman and two man . and instinctively they cover they private part and they do not let they .", "you have to be courageous , but it be very hard in a sense . so that when I think back really , if I would have to go through this again , I probably would not make it . so we be just practically naked , and my mom make for I a pair of sock from a empty bag of potato which use to be throw away from the kitchen . potato , pea . so I have a pair of pants make of a bag , and I do not have any shoe , so I have rag wrap around my foot .", "so they tell we you be go to be disinfect and shave . so everybody be shave up and down . men and woman naked go to the shower room , and the clothing be take to a disinfection place there . so we go naked into that shower room . we do not know what happen to the shower room , the gas chamber and all these thing .", "so everybody be shave up and down . men and woman naked go to the shower room , and the clothing be take to a disinfection place there . so we go naked into that shower room . we do not know what happen to the shower room , the gas chamber and all these thing . we do not know .", "those Jews , it be a tragedy . we still have something to wear , but they do not . they be , I would say , three-quarter naked . rag . and the soldier be beat they , .", "we be the only transport from L\u00f3dz Ghetto that do not go to Auschwitz ; he keep he word about that . Ravensbr\u00fcck , though , be a hell . we be strip of we clothes . we go through a medical examination , which be -- I can not even say the word `` embarrassing '' because the people who conduct it be less than human . they be less than animal .", "in that way we be very innocent . we be completely unaware of anything when we first come there . we experience with the selection , we have to stand naked in front of the -- I do not know -- doctor or whatever . you could not have a pimple on you body . you have to be perfect for work , and then look for the jewel , the vaginal experiment that -- it be -- the hell start right there .", "you could not have a pimple on you body . you have to be perfect for work , and then look for the jewel , the vaginal experiment that -- it be -- the hell start right there . we be strip of every , every human trace of behavior . the brutality , the killing , the sicc the dog -- the dog be sicc at the people . they be rip the people apart with the exception of I , I think .", "he play a concerto about Paris -lrb- `` An American in Paris '' -rrb- . and he play from `` Porgy and Bess '' , and just tear the house down . and I see Stupel present Bernstein with a Dachau strip haftle shirt , prisoner shirt , with the jewish star on it . and he weep . he be so profoundly affect .", "02:07:17 so they tell they , the first thing , take off the jacket . after -- and the overcoat , then the jacket . and 'til they come to the end , they be naked . and they be in line to go , they be put in the concentration camp , in the chamber , the gas chamber . I see the gas chamber before they start to build because I be there and be do some work there .", "thanks to the gold coin , food , you could obtain food during Ghetto time and get better accommodation for some good means to sustain yourself with gold coin . at that time , this be a very tragic time , because then Germans come they bring dog in the Ghetto , and they be go from house to house to look to see if you turn in all gold , and if you do not hide . and they even take some people to undress they completely , some woman to undress and the dog be train go and lick they sexual organ to make sure there be no coin of gold hide . Q : excuse I , what be that ? a : they have dog train , they use to take certain woman , tell they to undress completely , and the dog with its tongue would lick they sexual organ of the woman to find if they put any gold coin there .", "and they even take some people to undress they completely , some woman to undress and the dog be train go and lick they sexual organ to make sure there be no coin of gold hide . Q : excuse I , what be that ? a : they have dog train , they use to take certain woman , tell they to undress completely , and the dog with its tongue would lick they sexual organ of the woman to find if they put any gold coin there . Q : do you know people that this happen to ? a : yes I do .", "and they say to we , `` okay , go into this large area and disrobe . '' I mean by disrobe take everything off . so , here I be next to my mother , hundred of woman , and we have to be totally naked come in in front of a desk with a bunch of young hoodlum . so , what do you think in a case like that . they be creature from another planet .", "there be no planet then , but creature from hell . why should I bother worry about they , whether they look at I . how demeaning can you even feel stand with you mother and relative and family -- my sister-in-law -- and here you be stand totally naked , and they look at you . so , I just stand there , and they just look at we , and they tell we to go in the back to take shower , and they give we the uniform , the striped uniform , and this be how we ordeal start . this be concentration camp .", "Q : be you hit ? a : I be never hit , because I work . I tell you I just decide at one time , especially when I be stand there naked , that these be devil from some place , and I be go to look at they as such . so , this be my -- I brainwash myself . I figure they be not go to bring I down to they level .", "you can take my ring , you can take my watch , whatever I have , but please leave we here on the street , do not take we . '' so that be what happen . they strip we of everything we have and leave we in the corner of that street by the door of some building . so here we be , about twelve o'clock in the afternoon with nowhere to go , with nowhere to sleep , with no money . soon enough we have no choice but to try to find a way to get into the ghetto .", "they be teach how to make woman 's hair net . it be a fashionable thing at that time to do . they be take the car inner-tube or truck inner-tube and cut into small strip , very narrow strip . then they could buy white silk and then they be die the silk different color . be it a gold , gray , brown or black or navy blue .", "as a matter of fact , they hear about the other farm and they take care of he already . they go that night before they come to we . they wake up the whole family , the farmer refuse we entry ask he to strip completely from the waist down . Bent over a trunk of a tree and so on they beat he up with some ... branch of tree and so on . 06:09:02 they be bleed .", "he bring in he and in walk a pair of german britch . you know what the britch ; be ride pants . bind together on top , so I pull the cord , fall down , naked stand the little boy . this little boy must have be six , seven . he must be ten , something like that .", "and Wassileskov -lrb- ph -rrb- be the commandant . a fairly young man , I would say probably no more than 45 , and he march around with a whip and when he find a louse on a person , that person get 25 in front of everybody else , over they behind . over they naked behind . so when I hear of Singapore I be no longer very impressed you know . so , what else can I tell you ?", "we be first of all we be two year in a ghetto in Ozerkoff . so , they want less people , so one day we be assemble in the school auditorium , man , woman , and child . there be Nazis in front of we and we be tell to strip naked and parade in front of they . they look we over like a bunch of cattle and we be stamp like a bunch of cattle with a letter a or b . we be tell to get dress , go home , and wait for further order .", "the younger people they leave use they for work . those be the people that go away . Q : now , just tell I when you be stand naked in front of all of these Nazis have to parade around , that must have be a very unusual experience . I be wonder if it be more difficult for the girl ? a : I think I be shock because I have never see a naked male , not even my own brother .", "Q : now , just tell I when you be stand naked in front of all of these Nazis have to parade around , that must have be a very unusual experience . I be wonder if it be more difficult for the girl ? a : I think I be shock because I have never see a naked male , not even my own brother . it be shocking . I just look around myself and see everybody walk ahead so I figure this be what I have to do , try to shield yourself , you know part of you body because it be so embarrassing .", "it be call in polish halumintzfau -lrb- ph -rrb- . she could bring the work home . she be tear all kind of rag apart , make strip , braid the strip and fashion rug . what they need that for , I have no idea , but that be what she be do and every day she have to make a certain amount and deliver it the same day . so that be the work we be do there .", "so , he stand hesitated and push I towards she . over there again , we have to line up move forward closer towards the shower . before we enter we have -- walk farther down the line we be tell to strip naked and this on line always in five they look we over again , anyone that have a birth mark or a scar from surgery or some woman if they be middle age that survive the first selection and have some wrinkle on they body , be also take out of this line . from then , before they take we into the shower , they shave the hair on we body . every place a person have hair have be shave .", "and he come out , we see he , we give he we signal , we start to cough . he look around , he look up , he see we . he get back into the camp and tell the captain he get two refugee from a concentration camp and they be naked . and the captain say come in . he call we in , we come down , we go into the office and the captain look at we and give he a paper and he take we to the PX .", "they bring in representative from the neutral country , Sweden , Switzerland . they bring in the people -- representative , and they start to dig those gr -- mass grave -- those grave . and because the Russians , when they shoot those prisoner of war , they do not do it like the Germans do where they make they undress , shoe go to shoe , pants go to pants , jacket go to jacket , hair be shave . they remove jewelry . I mean , the Germans be quite methodical in they killing .", "Q. tell I about it , for people who do not see the movie . a . there be this -- you know when you come to Auschwitz the first time , that there be the -- they rob you completely naked , and you go in these shower room , but you do not know if it come out water or come out gas . the people , you do not know . and you be stand there , three hundred woman , and you be look upstairs , and we do not know what they be go to _______ .", "t : delousing . b : delousing . so the train would arrive and the patient would be take out from the train , take off , strip from the clothes , shave they hair and they clothes be disinfect , and the train be disinfect . there be two team work . there be the jewish team work on the dirty side and there be a lithuanian team work on the clean side .", "a. Yanosko , Limberg . they shave we and then you hear this scream because they ask everybody to open they mouth and they have like gold crown , they just knock it out , which be terribly painful . they just undress we . men , woman , child . it be almost unhuman .", "it be almost unhuman . then they push we to different barracks and when evening or at night when they build a fire and there like a ____________ which be like a heap and then they put a big fire and while we be sit there , you could see the fire . it be not a recreational fire , it be quite a large area and the flame be go up and with they rifle they be point to people give they instruction to dress , to undress , whatever there be , one gown you be wear and to throw himself on the burning . there be a mother and a daughter sit near I . I do not think the daughter maybe be 14 or 15 year of age .", "there be a mother and a daughter sit near I . I do not think the daughter maybe be 14 or 15 year of age . he point out only to the mother and when the mother be still undress , the daughter quickly get up and undressed and follow she , and many other perish the same way . sometimes they would take we out and they would have those vicious dog and when they find out that somebody be a rabbi , I remember one be a priest even who try to hide the jewish child , and push the dog and you could see how the flesh be come off these people . sometimes they hang the people and the jewish boy who be in control .", "we use to get enough ammunition of theirs , but that be hard . now , after the first battle line be over , we command order we to go back to position , only change position because we expect that this will not be the last battle . so all of these kill , include the Zundenfeur -lrb- ph -rrb- , the officer , we command order to go ahead , to strip they uniform off of they and just naked and cover with a blanket , put they back on a horse and wagon and we take one of the farmer , send they to the city to turn in they corpse and give they a note , `` do not fight we , because that be the way you be go to see the rest of you come back . '' it be true enough that we be there and the follow day the commander decide that we should be on guard again because they probably will send in a second force . and they do .", "I : I just remember something that for year , even today sometimes that besides you -- you know , you just say the smell . yes , it always be -- there be a awful smell there . it be horrible all the time , but what I remember be wait in line naked . stand outside naked wait on line to get into the shower and sometimes we would stand out there for many hour it seem and somehow I remember that be scary , because I do not know now , but I know that sometimes you do not get you clothes at the end of this shower and you be not go to be able to come back . but again , be probably silly child , at one time I have a locket from my mother that I wear around my neck and I know that when we undress for the shower if anybody see this , it would be real trouble , but I be brazen enough to think that I could actually get away with hide this in my hand , so I do remember take it off my neck and hold it very tightly in my hand to get into the shower and I probably lose it then right in the shower because -- do not come out with it but I remember it be a act of defiance on my part .", "yes , it always be -- there be a awful smell there . it be horrible all the time , but what I remember be wait in line naked . stand outside naked wait on line to get into the shower and sometimes we would stand out there for many hour it seem and somehow I remember that be scary , because I do not know now , but I know that sometimes you do not get you clothes at the end of this shower and you be not go to be able to come back . but again , be probably silly child , at one time I have a locket from my mother that I wear around my neck and I know that when we undress for the shower if anybody see this , it would be real trouble , but I be brazen enough to think that I could actually get away with hide this in my hand , so I do remember take it off my neck and hold it very tightly in my hand to get into the shower and I probably lose it then right in the shower because -- do not come out with it but I remember it be a act of defiance on my part . I say `` I can do this . ''", "it be horrible all the time , but what I remember be wait in line naked . stand outside naked wait on line to get into the shower and sometimes we would stand out there for many hour it seem and somehow I remember that be scary , because I do not know now , but I know that sometimes you do not get you clothes at the end of this shower and you be not go to be able to come back . but again , be probably silly child , at one time I have a locket from my mother that I wear around my neck and I know that when we undress for the shower if anybody see this , it would be real trouble , but I be brazen enough to think that I could actually get away with hide this in my hand , so I do remember take it off my neck and hold it very tightly in my hand to get into the shower and I probably lose it then right in the shower because -- do not come out with it but I remember it be a act of defiance on my part . I say `` I can do this . '' I do .", "there be one water well outside , a pump . that be where we in the morning we able to wash we face . we stand in line half naked in the cold and splash we face . you could not do more than that with a little pump when you have 500 people to go through and here you have to go out to commando , it be call , work commando . Q .", "it be May , April May . when we come to Sachsenhausen originally in October they bath we , just like they do for gas chamber and then they throw we clothing . we have undress , and a big guy would get a small piece of clothing and I get a coat it must have be from a dead woman of 400 pound . so , it become very useful in the camp during the winter , but to carry it on yourself in May . Europe have a mild climate .", ", '' we be chase into what they call `` the sauna . '' it be not a sauna that you picture , it be a huge place with shower , and they be real shower . we have to totally undress which be very unusual , in Europe in those day people just do not undress in front of stranger , there be man there too who shave we every place and they spray disinfectant on we and they , they hand we this soap that have initial . it say rjf . and rjf mean Rein Juedisch Fett , translate clean jewish Fat .", "and we learn how to discover the way they be signify by the Nazis . they would have a tatoo maybe underneath the arm just like the Gestapo would have . and some of they , which for hide purpose , when we start to undress they , we find map that they be carry with they . and we know that a guy who escape a prisoner of War Camp be not equip with a map , and he be not equip with a compass or anything like that because that would have be foolish to think . so that suspicion -- and believe I , we make they talk .", "and I remember so well , when we first come to the hospital , we be in Niedersh\u00f6nhausen , student -- we be 17 , 18 year old . and again I have to caution you to realize what that mean back in the 30 and in Berlin we be so , so simple , so naive . and then when we be transfer to the big hospital , the rumor go that , `` Dr. Lustig will inspect all the student nurse completely naked . and only the one that he like naked he would take in . '' of course it be a stupid rumor , and it do not occur at all , but that be he , he aura .", "and again I have to caution you to realize what that mean back in the 30 and in Berlin we be so , so simple , so naive . and then when we be transfer to the big hospital , the rumor go that , `` Dr. Lustig will inspect all the student nurse completely naked . and only the one that he like naked he would take in . '' of course it be a stupid rumor , and it do not occur at all , but that be he , he aura . that be he reputation .", "and we pick each other up again here in this country . we have really nothing in common otherwise , but that huge balloon of memory . we could talk with each other and it be like in the comic strip , you know , over we head be the same picture . you see ? be so weird .", "and he tell I , __________ . she give I a room and a bed . I be undress and put on pajamas and get ready for bed . and somebody ___________ . open .", "we child , child take longer to die from the gas . when the commander guy , this be a big haul , there be all kind of sign , a shower room . when you come in , you think __________ because you have to undress yourself . the commander have to help you , man and woman . then you be be shave , totally shave , a woman totally shave .", "somebody be send I this . you come . when you come , you undress yourself . First you undress everything . then you go to the shower .", "you come . when you come , you undress yourself . First you undress everything . then you go to the shower . then you go out from the other door from the shower and there be two man .", "so you take off these pants . you leave they over there . so you be run around in this climate naked under this -- that be the beginning . I see some guy who would take they bread , put it on fire . it become coal .", "I have a bladder infection . I be very sick before we go to Auschwitz . and when I be lie down naked on the ground in Auschwitz Q : oh , you probably a : that be okay .", "and what she go through in the camp she be lash and whip so many time . but that be another story . then we , from there , there be they shave we hair and I have long brown hair and my cousin , renya , say , `` you know , I could not recognize you '' so I be call , '' Tusa , tusa '' and so I come out and she see I and they shave we head and we be naked and we be suppose to lie down someplace on the ground to sleep overnight , which we do . everything seem completely insane . and miraculously , I awake , I do not have my bladder infection .", "but that be what we be talk about now . a : we talk about from Marx-Stadt , they send we to Funfteichen . in Funfteichen , we start civilize to make , you know -- from naked land , we make those camp . to make , let 's see , about 50 , 60 camp . Q : that you work on ?", "should I give you a little portray and a little episode about the washroom ? okay . they put in 25 guy naked , and the shower come from the ceiling , the shower . and one kapo , one animal or two , if you do not stay exactly what he say where it be suppose to be . so he throw dish , wash dish .", "nobody else . I ask and they tell I they be hungarian . they all almost naked after liberation . Q : Winter ? a : Winter .", "a : excuse I ? Q : the house you be live in be near that ; be that what you be tell I ? a : the house we live in in Landsberg be Lech , all this -- you know , in the Bible , in the Bible be write Abraham 's house be a house for the hungry , for the naked , for the poor . everybody who go in in Abraham 's house , he get a meal and clothing and dress and everything . we house be Abraham 's house .", "I be surprise , yes . I do not expect that bad . walk naked in the wood , walk naked -- just to punish they , not to give food , not to have water to drink , not to eat . one -- my , my -- I can not even -- my , my niece , my cousin , she steal a little potato . how can you blame a little 17 year old beautiful girl , she steal ?", "you never know what go on in people 's mind , but the fear be tremendous . and we be take into the shower where everybody have to get undressed . and I remember the horror for the first time in my life , that I have see adult naked . I do not even see child naked . I do not remember if I see myself naked .", "and we be take into the shower where everybody have to get undressed . and I remember the horror for the first time in my life , that I have see adult naked . I do not even see child naked . I do not remember if I see myself naked . I be just a little girl , and now I see child and mother and grandmother march around naked into these shower .", "and I remember the horror for the first time in my life , that I have see adult naked . I do not even see child naked . I do not remember if I see myself naked . I be just a little girl , and now I see child and mother and grandmother march around naked into these shower . and people be scream because they obviously do not think that those be shower .", "I do not even see child naked . I do not remember if I see myself naked . I be just a little girl , and now I see child and mother and grandmother march around naked into these shower . and people be scream because they obviously do not think that those be shower . obviously feel that this be the end of they , but we be shower .", "he in turn , make contact for we to be able to hide out with he . then he sister\u2011in\u2011law be with he , she come to he , she name be Brema I believe , with she son , he be a red\u2011headed boy . and then my father 's cousin come with he girlfriend , and then he brother and he wife come out , and my other cousin and my aunt , where I tell you I pull over my water on I from the samovar , she come instead of my grandparent , and my father get very upset and they go back to get my grandparent at which time they make a wrong turn and get catch and the way it be tell to we by some farmer , he be imprison and he try to buy he way out of prison with a piece of gold by one of the guy that be suppose to be release for be in there for drunkenness , and he figure if he have one piece of gold to give he , he have a lot more and he start fight with he and at that point they discover that he be jewish and they march he naked to the cemetery and execute he . so at that point we have lose all hope of get my father 's family , which be still in the ghetto , out . I we , people frequently ask , do you have any weapon ?", "I have to subdue it and I have to force myself to think rationally when all you being be say `` Run , Leah , run . '' 04:14:00 but , when I come on that appoint day to that clinic , I be put into a room and all of a sudden I realize that I be in a room full of prostitute . and I , first of all , I , I could hear the language , the way they behave and some of they be naked under they fur coat . and , and over there I meet my roommate from , from the early day in Krakow on the aryan side , Marysia and she say , '' what be you do here ? '' and I say , `` what be you do here ? ''", "04:57:30 and I have money on myself , which Cyvia Lubetkin give I in case I would be able to organize some help for they . I put it into my garter and when we arrive at that checking point , the Germans order everybody out from the wagon , except for the paralyzed old woman who could not move . we order to undress . so even , it be November , it be cold . in Poland November be pretty cold .", "so even , it be November , it be cold . in Poland November be pretty cold . we have to undress almost completely . I remember he be turn off the heel of my boot to see if I do not hide there anything because many Poles hide they belongings , they money . and he be , you know , they be , he have the long whip in he hand and he be , you know , go through my body with that whip and he order I to , to stand with my leg spread out .", "Q : and what kind of business be this ? a : Manufacturing textile . you come into we factory naked , you get out dress up from toe to head -- from head to toe , yeah . Q : so , it be , it be clothes ? a : it be underwear , yeah , and fabric and sweater and bathing suit .", "I be there maybe three week . they sell we right away . they put we out naked in November and the young Germans come to look we over , the transport , you know . the only thing be miss they do not look at we tooth because they look everything over . it be a very nice transport , young woman , professional young woman .", "you know , they be different . and they be shoot they on a hill there . they make they undress , and they be beat . some of they who do not want to , they would machine-gun everyone . and sometimes they make they dig they own ditch .", "there be not mass killing , except when they bring in people from the outside , yes . we do not see they be -- but we know because they take so many young people to dig up ditch , you know . and they would bring truckload of people daily , shoot -- make they undress . they would beat they to undress and shoot they and bury they -- and then have to bury they . I have one friend who survive .", "we do not see they be -- but we know because they take so many young people to dig up ditch , you know . and they would bring truckload of people daily , shoot -- make they undress . they would beat they to undress and shoot they and bury they -- and then have to bury they . I have one friend who survive . he be Jew , he be shoot in he arm .", "he take they all three out , and he beat they severely , you know , with some kind of whip . he make he walk to a point , you know , only maybe 100 , 200 foot . make they undress , he be beat they . it be a -- he get they help , they rip they clothes and he shoot they . just like that .", "I must have , yes . because when we come to Mauthausen , we come there at night . they undress we completely , we have to undress . nude . not only that , we have to go on a chair or table and they look all over you body and in you rectum .", "well , by then I be 17 , so I go into the camp and all the rest of the people -- I mean , the older people , and the people -- the child go to the gas chamber . but we do not know that . so when we get to the camp , we be first -- they undress we . we be send to the sauna , and in the sauna -- they cut we hair before that . they cut we hair , and then we be tattoo .", "unfortunately what he would say have be true . from there I go , I be transfer to Gestapo headquarters , Gestapo mean secret state police . and that be quite a terror , because I be beat , kick and I have to clean my own blood and my own vomit and then I be call before a man , I be ask to undress , and one look at my penis , and he look at the other and say , he be jewish . I should explain that there be man who be bear almost circumcise and I be one of they . matter of fact when I be oh , I guess 11 , I begin to masturbate and that cause a little problem , it cause pain and like in most case , like circumcision of the Jews , they just stretch the foreskin and then cut it , so it kind of roll back and the whole head of the penis be expose .", "and they take they and they shoot they there . they bring we information , for example , that one of my cousin , get out from the grave and he say , if you want , I will give you the hair off my head , but shoot we right . because about , they be all , they make they undress and they be shoot they and they be fall into the grave . but some be not shoot . they cover they when they be still alive .", "none of they could speak Polish . they need a translator for I . and I be strip of citizenship , of my belongings . whatever be mine be no longer mine and get six year hard labor , whatever . then I be put in the infamous rakayetska -lrb- ph -rrb- prison in Warsaw .", "on one of those broadcast from London , they be talk about civilian laborer who go to work in Germany from Belgium and from other country and the german use they until they be completely use up , totally wear out from the hard work and they tell they that they be go to send they to a place for recreation and they take they to a place which be , look like a shower and once they be in the shower , they drop the gas bomb in and they kill they all and then they burn they . so , in other word , I hear this from London , but the scenario be different , the place be different and as I find out , as we know , London be lie on many occasion and they be try to discourage hungarian christian from go to work as volunteer in Germany , for labor . and so , once somebody mention gas chamber , I know the whole story , I mean I know where , what it be about and then we be stand in this courtyard and just stand there naked and standing and standing and wait and then come in two prisoner with number tattoo on they forearm . Q : some prisoner come in ? a : mm-hm .", "by the way , it do not matter to anybody if there be 88 of we in that boxcar when we arrive and I just could not understand they because it be so important that 88 people should be in it , that nobody should escape and here it do not matter any more , no not at all . it be just one absurd thing after another , it be like a world completely topsy-turvy , it be just . and when we be stand there naked , wait to be process or whatever , the woman run by naked , scream . the same , we woman who get separate from we and who do not have child and who be select for labor , but my mother tell I many a year later , she say , I see you , but I be naked and you be naked so I would not say anything , ? _ or anything .", "it be just one absurd thing after another , it be like a world completely topsy-turvy , it be just . and when we be stand there naked , wait to be process or whatever , the woman run by naked , scream . the same , we woman who get separate from we and who do not have child and who be select for labor , but my mother tell I many a year later , she say , I see you , but I be naked and you be naked so I would not say anything , ? _ or anything . and then eventually a ss who be process they and who be chase they to the shower , he pull down the curtain for they so they would not have to be there , expose , naked .", "the same , we woman who get separate from we and who do not have child and who be select for labor , but my mother tell I many a year later , she say , I see you , but I be naked and you be naked so I would not say anything , ? _ or anything . and then eventually a ss who be process they and who be chase they to the shower , he pull down the curtain for they so they would not have to be there , expose , naked . which again , so unlike a ss , that he have some consideration . Q : so for the record how long be you in Auschwitz _ ?", "it be seed distributor in Hungary and it be call Mautner and everybody know the Mautner seed and they be in existence for generation , so maut and hausen like in Muenchhausen or something , so could remember that name . and then they start march we and it be a long march on pebbly road and secondary road and first through a village and then through a countryside and road and turn out that , I find this out already in Auschwitz , that my brother have a hole in the sole of he shoe and while we be wait to be load onto the train in Auschwitz , I see pile of empty carton or case from lamp , light bulb , which , they be always change the light bulb in the electric fence , the lighting so nothing would ever burn out or get disconnect or something , but and there be pile of these so I put some of those in my pocket for future use and to put my margarine into it and so I stuff several of those into my brother 's shoe so there would be something between the pebble of the road and the sharp stone and he foot , but it do not help much and he be just in pain and cry and he be hot , it be warm , very bright sun and we be thirsty and it be a long march and hard and ss on both side and yell . so finally we get to the camp Mauthausen , which be a very , I do not know , forbid look place , the whole , the wall again , they be not temporary , they be make , build from granite stone and they be like maybe two and a half meter high or three meter high and on the top of the stone fence there be strip of barb wire again , like maybe five strip and again with the insulator to let you know that they be electrify and it take the better part of a day to get process there and again somebody come , a german prisoner and pick out the younger one and you go , you stay over here and among those be my brother and I try to yank he back to the group where I be and the guy spot it and he pull he out again . and then I try to go , I try to sneak into that group and he spot I and pull I back and I try one more time and he say , you try it one more time and you will get it . so that be the last time I see my brother .", "and he be a attorney in Munkacz and be a very nice person . and again that be fortunate for I that I meet he and that he be that nice . and after sort and be check by a ss doctor , again undressed naked and a floodlight on you to see what shape you be in and he pick out I do not know how many of we and we get assign to one barracks . we find out when we be there that we be work in tunnel on a rotate shift and eight hour shift and we shift happen to start on Sunday night at 11 . so it would be from 11 until 7 in the morning work in the tunnel .", "that be what I think about -- what we do so that they would have shoe . dp . and what they do , and what they do when they take the shoe off -- the Jews before go in the undress room -- before go into the crematoria . so worry that we man would not have shoe and they be so worried that they could not take ` em off fast enough . they be in the bin , be not they -- in the museum .", "I use to get a piece of bread , usually int he morning , with some black stuff to drink and I remember that I would always , since I be always -- maybe it be in the afternoon -- because I be always hungriest in the morning so I think it would be really clever for I to try to save this piece of bread so I would have it the next day and of course it usually be go and I do not understand it but now in retrospect I think the rat and mouse at Auschwitz must have love I . they know who to come to . I remember stand in line , humiliate standing outside in the cold naked wait to get into the shower and also terribly scared because somehow I know that you do not always come out of the shower . I do not know quite what happen , but I know you do not always come back . I be amaze at my , I guess call it chutzpa , because I have a locket on my neck , a gold locket from my mom and I be determine to hang on to this and of course if they have see it , I do not know what would happen to I , but I take it off my neck and hold on to in my hand and somehow get pass the guard .", "once I go to Berea and talk to the Berea class , and that be the worst . they be just uninterested , sleepy people with a professor who , himself , put I asleep . I just could not blame the student , by that time , they be so turn off , that no matter what I do , I could have strip nude , and it would not have make much of a difference in that class . but the middle-school kid , the junior high , they be just great to talk to . one girl ... just yesterday , I be speak to a class , and one little girl stay behind , and I usually spend about a hour and a half with they .", "I say , `` what be you talk about ? '' the german commander , they be stand in front of the tank , they tie they down evidently , I do not know . and they , with no medal , they strip they of all the medal , but I do not see that . I still see the Nazis , I say , `` what you talk about ? here they be . ''", "they have nothing . so , what happen with those rabbi , they take they out from the attic . they tell they to take off they clothes , all naked . they put they against that particular wall and they shoot they with the machine gun , they finish they up . Q .", "I have to look around what to do after the concentration camp . I be poor . I have nothing , almost naked , nothing to wear . I have to look around what to do . so , you know , I come out from it .", "the camp commander would come in who be a drunkard and a sadist . he would come in every day , pick out ten man and beat they up . tie they to a pole , naked , and whip they with he horse whip , the whip he use for he horse . just to show the rest of we . we be about 4,000 in there .", "we start to die in that barn . epidemic of typhoid , dysentery , hunger . every morning the guard order the little bit healthier woman to take out the dead and dress they naked cause the clothes you can recycle and dump the body in the hole . my dear friend , what my eye see , in those three week that I be in the barn , it be very hard to tell , to share , to describe . many time I feel I do not want to talk about it anymore but we be sit , this tape be for history , to learn the truth .", "we have nothing . because we be take from home . we be take to Shtoodruff -lrb- ph -rrb- , we be strip naked , we be not successful to bring anything , anything of we own through . some people that go back to Poland , let 's say if I would have be from Lodz , originally , maybe when I come back if I would have go to my old house , maybe I would have find something . also do not forget , many people come back to Poland and go to the little village and be kill because of that possession .", "Q : it seem to I that ... a : yeah , I , I do not know if I ever tell that story -lsb- talkover -rsb- but when we come -lsb- talkover -rsb- how important they be . when we come to Shtoodruff -lrb- ph -rrb- and we go through that shower so-called , and we stand outside for a long time naked and then we be give a dress , a pair of underpants , a pair of shoe . they just throw it to we . they do not say what size or whatever .", "one day this german woman , a nazi , uniform , I will never forget she name , she name be Berta , she be wear these leather boot and a whip , just flip around she whip against she boot and be point with the , with the whip to certain man and young boy , and only with , with , with good skin on they , that the rib be not expose , the bone be not expose , I have no idea why . and she point at I and my number be take down by one of she helper . upon that , a request come from a camp that they need a few hundred man to build certain air strip . it be kind of emergency and they call the block\u00e4ltester . from that barrack , he name be Heinz , a young man , he get along with I very good and he put I on the transport .", "Q : you have be transport to ? a : I be transport fr ... to many , many camp . from camp to camp , from camp to camp , because , as I say , the Germans be build little air strip , so always a few hundred man be in a certain , out of a village , like they have a , they have a shack make out of metal and they keep we there . but on the last day of war , like maybe it be know already to you that they put all the inmate on a dead march , and I be among also they , a dead march . we be march and march and march and march , thousand of , of people , of man , thousand of they , and everyday there be less and less and less and less .", "and , and I see these thing happen because there be certain time where , where ss soldier be bring to concentration camp for not fulfil the order that they receive . I do not know exactly what the order be . like one very high rank officer come to concentration camp and he be strip of the uniform , put on concentration camp uniform , shave the head , and we have to speak to he . he say , `` well , I be a very high rank officer and I come home on vacation and my wife and the child be deport to a camp . '' he say , `` why ? ''", "let 's see , he say , those who return from the concentration camp , from the ghetto in Transnistria -lrb- ph -rrb- ? a : yeah . Q : Transnistria , or from the force labor camp , be naked , poor and without shelter . but they carry in they heart , the star of hope and unshaken faith in the new world in which they would find the place they deserve , the place that suit they . that sound , to I ...", "I be very diligent in my work and I strive to keep the money , to do not spend the money and to do a living , buy a house , you know , in that way . I want , I want to ensure my life and we family 's life , for a good old time life , I mean when we get old . Q : I want to read what Butenaro say about speak out , he say near the end of the silent Holocaust , that he hope he book be a cry to strip away the layer of indifference and guilty silence by just come out and tell one 's story . do you , do you share that at all ? a : as I say , I tell my story for the benefit of the Museum , I like and I appreciate very much how they handle the whole Holocaust problem and everything .", "and then there be shout go on and we really do not know what be go on . they separate the man and they separate the woman . and they tell we to undress . I mean , we be the four woman and the man be somewhere else . and we see quite a big crowd of people outside .", "I know there be a blue light on top and there be a drain in the floor . it seem to I like there be a pipe on the ceiling but it do not look like a shower at all . there be , what I think today it be , that when we be be de-loused , they be put , we would undress in one room and put out clothes on a cart , which be wheel into a sort of chamber , the door be close . then we go through shower . that be not when , that be later when we be in the camp .", "and it seem to I that they have several chamber like that because there be thousand of we at one time that they be give we the bath . and it seem to I that that be the chamber that we be lock into . and after a while , I mean , we just stand there , but for just a few moment , a few minute , the door open and they push in two woman , naked . and they throw in a little baby that look kind of cripple , they just throw it on the floor and shut the door again , and then we know that we be do for . and nothing be happen .", "tape 4 Q : we be go to go back just a little bit to before you enter the room that you be just describe . and be you undress while you be in that room ? a : no . right out , when they , now I do not , it seem to I , in which room ?", "right out , when they , now I do not , it seem to I , in which room ? Q : in the room that you be wait and that the two woman with the child be push in . be you undress before that ? a : no , we be naked in that room , but we be tell to undress . you see , they separate the woman , we , the hungarian woman from the man .", "Q : in the room that you be wait and that the two woman with the child be push in . be you undress before that ? a : no , we be naked in that room , but we be tell to undress . you see , they separate the woman , we , the hungarian woman from the man . we be in two separate room .", "you see , they separate the woman , we , the hungarian woman from the man . we be in two separate room . and we be tell to undress , the four woman . evidently the man be tell to undress too . and then we come into that small chamber from one side and the man come in from the other side .", "we be in two separate room . and we be tell to undress , the four woman . evidently the man be tell to undress too . and then we come into that small chamber from one side and the man come in from the other side . there be two door to that chamber .", "and then we come into that small chamber from one side and the man come in from the other side . there be two door to that chamber . and so we be naked in that room . and then when they let we out again , they separate . we go to one side and the man go to the other side .", "and then when they let we out again , they separate . we go to one side and the man go to the other side . and we be all naked . Q : so when you go to get you be hair shave , be you still naked ? have they give you any clothes ?", "we go to one side and the man go to the other side . and we be all naked . Q : so when you go to get you be hair shave , be you still naked ? have they give you any clothes ? a : yes , we be still naked .", "Q : so when you go to get you be hair shave , be you still naked ? have they give you any clothes ? a : yes , we be still naked . we be naked when we have we head shave and after they be shave , we be give clothes from a big pile that be on the side . and I be give some underwear , just a pair of bloomers .", "have they give you any clothes ? a : yes , we be still naked . we be naked when we have we head shave and after they be shave , we be give clothes from a big pile that be on the side . and I be give some underwear , just a pair of bloomers . because I remember they be very large , kind of long , old-fashioned .", "somehow for all that time we be always together . and then another work that I be do be , to this day i have no idea what it actually be , somebody say this be something in connection with ammunition , and it be a , we be lead into a room with long table . and there be a nail on the table and there be a pile of rag and strip of rubber , just flat rubber strip . and we be suppose to plate braid . the hook be to hook on the beginning , you tie it up and then you start to plait and roll the ball and hook on again .", "you see , we go to sauna and the de-lousing so-called . and when we be completely undressed , you see the routine be as I say we bundle we clothes and put it on this cart which be wheel into the de-lousing compound which I think be the temporary , provisional little gas chamber , but anyway , that be where we be . in a room where we undress and then the ss man come in and start to whip right and left , right and leave . and doot-sie -lrb- ph -rrb- mother be by then , she be a older woman , I mean today its not a older woman if you be in you be late 50 's or so . but she be in a bad shape and she be really very , very skinny and very old look .", "and many other . but Kramer be the one and the woman be the other one that we be all cheer , that they get catch . and then what the british do that I never forget either , they have the german soldier pile the corpse up in truck and they have Kramer take he shirt off and lay naked at the top of the corpse . and drive , they drive to the big ditch and bury the people . and I know that the truck be go back and forth , and back and forth , with all the dead people .", "a : allow I to take off my jacket . Q : good for you ! a : I will not strip , do not worry ! Q : would it be okay if I sit in between the two of you ? a : I do not mind .", "Q : but that be what I mean . a : that be what I just say . that everybody who have something could bring it in because nobody , they do not have to undress , like when they go to the camp in Auschwitz , they have to completely strip and everything be take away from they . so , naturally , people come into the ghetto with whatever valuable they have . but they do not hide .", "and they take we to that Monowitz , Auschwitz III , middle of the night and then as I disembark from the , unload from the truck , they take we to the , to the shower room , some kind of a shower room and so forth and there I receive my first , my first knock from a ss because I be talk and he be behind and he give I a punch in the face and , I never have one like that before . so we enter , there be a guy there , a prisoner , speak french and translate , well , tell we what to do . undress , everybody undress , so forth . once we be naked , there be a intimidation beating of a prisoner . a ss be there and the two , two Poles come and they take somebody in the group and they , they beat he , you know __________ , to show what it be , what we have to expect if we ... and I do not know if they kill he but the guy be on the floor and we be already , the message pass through .", "so we enter , there be a guy there , a prisoner , speak french and translate , well , tell we what to do . undress , everybody undress , so forth . once we be naked , there be a intimidation beating of a prisoner . a ss be there and the two , two Poles come and they take somebody in the group and they , they beat he , you know __________ , to show what it be , what we have to expect if we ... and I do not know if they kill he but the guy be on the floor and we be already , the message pass through . and then the french guy give we a little , a little detail on what be go to happen to we .", "the whole camp , that be a miserable time , outside , wait and wait in the cold , before go to work and then there be the selection . now the selection , that be the worst . the worst event in camp life , when the , everybody be consign into the barracks in the evening and everybody have to go in front of a ss , naked and then he decide if we be too weaks and so forth . that be the end , you do not go to work the next day , but you would go in a truck and the truck would take you to Birkenau , to Auschwitz . that be , I see some act of heroism , also some people go instead of another , to pass in front of the ss and give a phony number , they risk they life to save other people .", "I write this poem May 11 , 1980 . when age of civilization crumble to dust and death be rage supreme when the Devil be crown by the power of deceit then freedom be a far away dream . when all that you love be take from you and you be strip to the bare bone when all moral boundary and law be break then you be in hell with satan alone . when jew be depict as sub-human , as vermin and brute force and evil prevail when nazi doctor turn child to corpse then all logic and reason fail . when the whole world remain dead silent with the exception of just a few then they grant Satan license and opportunity to murder in the gas chamber a god-loving jew .", "yes , and another thing . there be a ______________ , you know ? so , and they sometimes Mengelia or other doctor would come and we have to strip and , which be _________ . he would look we over and those who look already skinny or they be too sick or , away to , but at that point , away to the gas chamber . there be a block where they would send away , and sometimes they do not have enough time to get they out , so they would put they , put they in this block and they no longer give they food or anything .", "so we could not take out anything . and that be so humiliating for I . a girl who be modest , who would not even undress in front of she parent . and you know I be like a bud teen-ager when the Holocaust begin . and here , to go through , that sometimes I wish I would have still walk in the outside commando because each time they do this , I feel like I be die by inch .", "a university city , to a hospital . and I be alive but I have no home to live in so the hospital , they give I my first home after liberation . but before we go in we have to strip again , naked , throw away the tattered concentration camp shift , and we get a bed . and after all those year , nearly six year , I see myself in front of the mirror . I could not speak a lot of Swedish , or understand .", "Q : be people hysterical ? a : yeah . some be hysterical , some be very quiet and depressed and on the Carrera -lrb- ph -rrb- we see naked people lie , some be dead , some be not dead , emaciated and the insane people hunch over they and eat they alive . and on the Carrera -lrb- ph -rrb- there be a few building that have no window , the war have go , have happen there before this happen and in these few building , we be , I would say , 20 or 30 people in a small room , so that , and we sleep on the floor . it be so tight that when one person want to turn at night , everybody else have to turn .", "___________ there , the ____________ 200 about people I have to accept ____________ go in here , who have , who have be bring over with , from , by cart and be hide in the synagogue basement . and then there be about 80 or 90 other people who have hear in France and in Southern Italy that there be a possibility to escape here and ___________ load onto ship , a ship leave half empty . it be the , the strip of ___________ without any problem , the ___________ land ____________ . it be the first transport without ____________ , I think it be very bad ____________ , out of the ___________ because ____________ be a very capable man . he probably want to make some money too , I would not have mind if he , as long as he get the people out .", "near I be stand a beautiful young woman , she be much older than I but she be a real beauty with blue eye and blond hair and despite that she come from the ghetto , somehow she be outstanding . and they be beat she for no reason . you know when you stand there , you be not a person , you do not have a name , you just have a number and then they tell we to line up and to disrobe and naked we be take to a very big place . the only thing remarkable about this very big place , it be that it have like showerhead on top and since we hear about gassing , I and my sister and my aunt , we be prepare that they take we to a gas chamber . so I be stand all naked by this little shower head and I be , we be say goodby and I be beg God for one thing ... I should be the first one should fall because I could not see with my aunt and my sister , ___________ , so I be there really pray the first time in my life with the way I could and I say , `` Momma , help I , I want to be the first one . ''", "you know when you stand there , you be not a person , you do not have a name , you just have a number and then they tell we to line up and to disrobe and naked we be take to a very big place . the only thing remarkable about this very big place , it be that it have like showerhead on top and since we hear about gassing , I and my sister and my aunt , we be prepare that they take we to a gas chamber . so I be stand all naked by this little shower head and I be , we be say goodby and I be beg God for one thing ... I should be the first one should fall because I could not see with my aunt and my sister , ___________ , so I be there really pray the first time in my life with the way I could and I say , `` Momma , help I , I want to be the first one . '' for a eternity , they close the door , for a eternity ; we think ... some people become hysterical , mother be kiss they daughter , they be say goodby , people be faint ; then all of a sudden , water start to come out , it be not gas , they put we to wash up and clothes and it be like water of life ! we be drink , we be wash .", "why be you laugh ? because no , she have , she feel sick and she be diagnose as a Typhus candidate . so , girl be stand there naked , it be hot , wait ... a : -lsb- speak foreign language here -rsb- I : yeah , wait for the ss doctor .", "Q : Shirt . a : no , a undershirt -lsb- talkover -rsb- . and I tear it up to strip in order to help one of the woman to cover she back . there be no salve , no medicine , no nothing and the groan and the moan I have still in my ear . from there we go then on Wieherachen , there be another big place and some other prison which I do not remember into Berlin .", "a : no , first of all , I do not remember we arrival . I just know that we go then into a building . we go through a line where this young lady be I tell you about who be suppose to help I and I talk to she and they take all we belongings away and then we go on and we come into a room where we have to undress and where we get Lager clothes . and , and then we be again assemble and then we go out and go to this block to , no , in the beginning we all go to the block that be the receive block where everyone of we have to go . in we group that arrive there be french nun , polish youngster from , the ss have close up or empty the whole , the Lyzeum .", "Q : do you remember you reunion , where you , you have a big smile on you face . a : oh yes , it be a very pleasant thing because you know , the nicest thing that have , anybody have do for I through the war and you know at the end of the war be this little birthday book . and the only way that I be able to save that , because you know , we be stark naked all the time so we could not save anything , but this be just nine day before the war and I must have learn from my mother to hide my bread , she hide the bread near the bosom and for those nine day I keep that there and somehow it be not find . so right now it be in the , in a museum , Holocaust museum in Houston , on display . Q : be you in touch with these two woman now ?", "so we be hope for to be able to start a new , decent life again . Q : do you bring anything with you , any item that be very special to you family ? a : well I have nothing that survive , because when we be take to Auschwitz , we be strip naked and everything be take away from we . so I have nothing from before . the only thing that I have and that I hold onto and I just give to the Holocaust museum here in Houston , be my little birthday book that be give to I just nine day before the war be over .", "my mother give some private lesson to various people who want to learn german . most of she pupil be serious . there be one rather peculiar young woman , who be interested only in the sp -- the specialize vocabulary , such as undress and underwear and so on . so anyway my -- my mother teach she whatever she want to know or need to know for she profession , and do not matter , she pay . then in November , at -- at my -- the -- at the end of October , the -- this be -- be after harvest time , the farmer decide he no longer need my father and so send he home .", "then they sa -- well , several year . anyway , they start grill I and they have a Pole who apparently work for they . First of all they have I s -- strip I naked and they search I everywhere for tattoo , because ss man often have tattoo , could not find anything . well , then the american sit across from I , he be carry on a conversation with the Pole . do you see ?", "there -- neither of they look jewish and they describe some of they experience to I . I be not sure in which trial they be to testify , i-i do not hear much about they testimony , but they tell I some of they story , how they have be take prisoner . and one of they be of -- assign as a -- not quite valet , it be too fancy a term , but to some german medic , and the german medic apparently know , for whatever reason , that this man be circumcise , and he say , well , I know that before long there will be -- you will all be strip and they will try to find the Jews among you , and if it be all right with you I will perform a little operation so that you -- it will not be obvious that you -- you be circumcise . and if they ask you , then say you have phimosis , which be of a -- when the foreskin get very tight , so that -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- it can not quite normally function , then one normally operate it -- and then it leave some scar , but it be not like a full circumcision . so he -- he do this operation for he , which put the -- the man be rather uncomfortable for three day , but after that it heal , and it may have save he life .", "it so happen that they point out one of my friend . a beautiful girl . she name be Susza Fein , and they put she and they undress she and they start to look in every place if she do not conceal something . she be in this time 19 year old . and they do it so cruel that they use instrument that they cut open she belly .", "and this be a emergency door . when he run out I shoot after he , and I hit he in the spine , and he fall down . now we be naked . my brother do not know what be go on . so he start to yell to they , `` what you play with firecracker ?", "and so , more or less I figure out that I will go this way and there be a house that I know this house , and this peasant be friendly . I say , `` if we would be lucky , and if I would hit this house , we would be save . '' now imagine if peasant will see we in the middle of the winter , two people naked without shoe . well , anyway , we start to go down , so I have my two revolver . I have everything on I .", "I like to say to the people who make that kind of a statement , that Jews go to the slaughterhouse like sheep . how do you fight machine gun and submachine gun with you bare hand ? I would like , I would like they to tell I how this can be when you be surround by hundred of storm trooper with heavy weapon , and you stand there naked . men , woman and child in the yard . how do you expect to fight back ?", "they do not go willingly I assure you . that be a very , very foolish thing to say , and I get very emotional about that , when somebody say that thing . they stand in that yard , naked man , woman , and child , surround by machine gun and submachine gun , and they , people expect they to fight back ? you do not have the strength to fight . you do not have the emotion to fight .", "that be one of the punishment . the other one , the camp commander would come in every morning . he would take 8 to 10 , 8 to 10 inmate out , strip they naked , tie they to a post and beat they . and where would they beat they mostly ? on they sex organ , where it hurt the most .", "if you do not look right to the camp commander when he pass by or you do not work hard enough , or this bahis do not beat you hard enough while you be drag in the sand through the desert , he would take you at the end of the day , and he would say , `` Quinze jours --------------------- . '' that mean fifteen day in the , at the fort . they would tie you arm in the back and hang you on you arm naked for about 2 , 3 day you would hang on you arm , and every night they would come in , when it be the coldest , and hose you down with ice cold water , and beat you about , and that be fun for they , they would laugh when they do it . when you get through hang there , and when they cut you down , you be not able to walk , in fact you be lucky to be alive . I go there twice .", "there be one day we have to decide , we , we , we know we be go to die there because there be really no hope , really , we do not fool ourselves . all along you fool yourself , take a beating , not eat , not drinking , no sleep , worry for you life . we fool ourselves there be uh maybe , maybe a little light at the end of the tunnel , maybe somebody will , we will ----------- somebody that will help we , maybe be a place that we can hide , maybe there be something that we , that they will not catch we or find we or , or beat we or ... in this camp we realize , we really , this be really the end of the line , I mean , how much can you absorb , how much beating , how much hunger , how much thirst , how much lice , we use to kill the lice every morning on the rag we wear , how we walk around naked , we have no ... let 's stop . beep .", "they say , `` we be go to make they scream in pain , and they could not do that . and that get they very angry . and that make they figure out more punishment , and bigger punishment , and longer punishment , and more beating , and no water for the day , and no food for 2 day , and , and , and stand naked be tie to a post in the sun all day , in the hot african sun , and , and put a bucket of ant over you head , and bury you in the sand to you neck and urinate on you head , and beat you head open , and nothing they do could make we make a sound . oh , we want to , but that be the only way would , we could get back at they . if you go to kill we , then you can beat we to death -- go ahead and do it , that be the way it be get to be .", "and we wait for they , they surround the camp , they say , `` who be you people ? '' you have to understand we be only about 300 and some leave out of 4000 . naked . no haircut for 2 year . no bath for 2 year .", "no , no , no ! the the , the , the cruelty , and the , and the , and the barbaric manners of the guard uh , uh , uh , that come out by themselves , nobody tell they to beat we all the time , nobody tell they to chain we together , nobody tell they to beat we up in chain , and whip , and whip we and , and , and , that camp commander in Jaffa in Africa , nobody tell he to deny we water or deny we a piece of bread , or , or not to give we uh , not to have we work uh , uh so much in the hot sun . nobody tell they , not , nobody tell they to tie we naked to a post and beat we , and to hang we by we arm and hose we down , to bury we in the , in the sand so we head should look up and , and , and , and bash they brain in and urinate on they head , nobody tell they to do that . they tell we to keep we there until , until uh , we , we be suppose to be confine and work on the Transaharian . but nobody tell they how much or how hard or how , or what time of day .", "you come in , the Drs use to look you over at that time , remember this be the beginning of Auschwitz at that particular time . Dachau exist much longer , uh , the camp , but Auschwitz just begin , as much as I understand when I come in . uh , the uh , you have to undress , they shave you hair , they give you the striped uh , uh pants , and at that particular time also , people use to have , they do not cut they both side , they cut just in the middle , just the middle hair , use to be cut off , and you could not escape , because they always , they recognize you , and of course you get the number . and uh right away you , of course , you know you start work the way , whatever they want you to do , that be what you do . mainly build stuff and all this kind of thing .", "do you see you mother at the same time ? I see my mother -- ------------ , but tell it to I as though you do not tell I before . well , uh , my , my father , like I say , my father come , he be stand in line , my mother be on the other side , on the other side of the truck , where at that time , and this be a very painful uh situation for I as a youngster uh because the woman have to undress completely right there where you be stand , on the other side , and the man be on this side . now why at that time , the woman undress there , I have no idea , but this what we do , all the woman have to undress , and the man stand on this side of course , which be the rail , the railroad run through the middle , and there be one side and then this and man , as I remember , face towards the camp , the woman be on the left side and the man be on the right side if you face , or you be march down towards the selection . and I wave to my mother , I could not go over there talk to she , but it be very painful for I to see my mother naked , but , come at that particular time , I be sure everybody feel the same way , and I speak to my father , like I say , I s-because the way I be bring up , you know , we be a home with God , and uh , we be child of God , and my God , and you know and , and I be pretty religious bring up , and what I see at that time change my mind a little bit , and I raise just that question with my father , `` where 's God ?", "I see my mother -- ------------ , but tell it to I as though you do not tell I before . well , uh , my , my father , like I say , my father come , he be stand in line , my mother be on the other side , on the other side of the truck , where at that time , and this be a very painful uh situation for I as a youngster uh because the woman have to undress completely right there where you be stand , on the other side , and the man be on this side . now why at that time , the woman undress there , I have no idea , but this what we do , all the woman have to undress , and the man stand on this side of course , which be the rail , the railroad run through the middle , and there be one side and then this and man , as I remember , face towards the camp , the woman be on the left side and the man be on the right side if you face , or you be march down towards the selection . and I wave to my mother , I could not go over there talk to she , but it be very painful for I to see my mother naked , but , come at that particular time , I be sure everybody feel the same way , and I speak to my father , like I say , I s-because the way I be bring up , you know , we be a home with God , and uh , we be child of God , and my God , and you know and , and I be pretty religious bring up , and what I see at that time change my mind a little bit , and I raise just that question with my father , `` where 's God ? look at what happen here . ''", "well , uh , my , my father , like I say , my father come , he be stand in line , my mother be on the other side , on the other side of the truck , where at that time , and this be a very painful uh situation for I as a youngster uh because the woman have to undress completely right there where you be stand , on the other side , and the man be on this side . now why at that time , the woman undress there , I have no idea , but this what we do , all the woman have to undress , and the man stand on this side of course , which be the rail , the railroad run through the middle , and there be one side and then this and man , as I remember , face towards the camp , the woman be on the left side and the man be on the right side if you face , or you be march down towards the selection . and I wave to my mother , I could not go over there talk to she , but it be very painful for I to see my mother naked , but , come at that particular time , I be sure everybody feel the same way , and I speak to my father , like I say , I s-because the way I be bring up , you know , we be a home with God , and uh , we be child of God , and my God , and you know and , and I be pretty religious bring up , and what I see at that time change my mind a little bit , and I raise just that question with my father , `` where 's God ? look at what happen here . '' and the answer be , `` this be the way God want it , this be the way it be go to be . ''", "as soon as they go in , the door be lock behind they , and then the gas be flow , and everybody have die . the terrible thing , maybe , to add to that , I should say , be that then the ss would send some of we prisoner to go and pick up the dead body and cart they away . when , when we be just get to ourselves what happen , we be take to uh another barrack , we be strip completely , and have to take a little shower , and the very same gas chamber where these won-wonderful people and the poor , poor child be take and be gas , we really take a shower . when the , the gas where there be flow through the pipe , now they let water through . I know because I be in it also to shower in reality .", "we at home always use to exchange gift . we child would put we little penny together to buy for we parent ' anniversary or , or birthday , but here we have nothing . the Nazis strip we of everything . so I come up with the idea to give a ration of bread for a day to he as a birthday present , and I tell Zolton , and he like the idea . so , in the evening , we hold out we hand , say , `` Father , for you . ''", "it be small , they , after the transporter come they pick out about 50-60 people , and they take care later for clean up , as I say , after the transport , and , and then they shoot these people . but somehow for , it look for they not efficient enough , so they pick out people , so when I come in camp , there be there maybe 100 people work there . uh , so and , and they work be we clean up just the mess after the people , do separate the clothes from the train , cleaning , thing like that , so as I say , we have uh the , the , the job be , I have the separate the clothes of sort the clothes , but not always because if it come some special thing , what they find some special job , they pick you just , and they let you do , so I be once , they pick I to , they cut the hair of the woman , and that be in we barrack about , about 10 mo-10 feet-from , of I , ten foot from uh , yard , ten yard , about from the gas chamber , and they take we about 20 , 20 people go to this barrack , and we have to cut , randomly cut the long hair from the woman , the people , when the woman come in there naked with child and thing like that , be terrible view , terrible view . some people , the polish people they know what be go on , but we have also people from Holland and other country , what they be not aware really , they still believe that they still , nothing go to happen , and they ask we question , but the Germans be around in a room like here , and they could not , they could not , we could not talk with they , we could not say anything because if we would open we mouth , we would go with they together , so we do not do , so sometimes I be catch , they call I for this kind of work , what we do , it be a horrible thing . now , as I say , we have , uh , uh , permanent job , a permanent job , mostly be the kind of work , but when the transport , when no , no transport , they usually take we for work uh , to dig or to the wood .", "now this be another story what be , really actually , I believe in it . Mengele come in make a selection . and they take we , tell we to strip naked . well , we strip naked . and we use to go from , around they ------------ in front of Mengele .", "Mengele come in make a selection . and they take we , tell we to strip naked . well , we strip naked . and we use to go from , around they ------------ in front of Mengele . okay ?", "after the guard go out from she backyard , she call I into the house . I walk into the house , she have , a tub of water , hot water . she tell I to strip , she put I in the hot tub of water . she shave I , my hair off , lice be that big on my body . she clean I up , wash I up .", "God send I guest . '' Fine . so we stay in the house , and middle of the night , I hear he run naked , never see a naked man in my life at that point , and he be pull my mother by the hand , `` come , I have get to show you something . '' and do not forget , when you be frightened , everything frighten you . so , he be pull my mother by the hand , I be behind my mother , my sister behind I , we be all run .", "how do you fight with bare hand against gun . I mean , they be mighty . they strip you of you dignity before they kill you . when you have no dignity , there be no life . they strip you of whatever you believe in .", "they strip you of you dignity before they kill you . when you have no dignity , there be no life . they strip you of whatever you believe in . you be nothing . there be ... how can you fight this .", "they come , the hungarian , uh police , just , first of all we be always uh , brutalize because uh they would just come in and uh , uh take out some girl and , and , and make they do all kind of uh of stupid thing , or man , they would tell the man to walk on all four and uh be like horse and they would ride on they in , in order to , to brutalize they , but then come uh the time when , when they just chase everybody out , they tell we the day before that we can pack one small suitcase , and we should be ready to leave the ghetto . when we come to the , it be a um , at one time , a factory for uh , brick , and there they s-start to search we again . the ss be there also , and every woman have to and every girl have to undress naked and we be search internally for valuable . my mother be a really religious person , and all I could think of be how terrible this be for my mother to go through something such , such a terrible ordeal . when we be finish , my mother take the baby from my sister , she , because she be hold the little boy Donny , and , she have a bottle of milk for the child , and the ss grab the bottle of milk and say , let 's see you cow what you have there , and my mother plead please , the , this be , the child need the milk , please do not take the milk from , from my um grandson .", "she have only a chance , and my mother have only a chance to yell out to I , `` please take care of you sister . '' my name be Cecilie , and this be how she call I , how she call I , how she call out Cecilie , take care of you sister , because she know the pain my sister would sister when she find out where she take she young son . but we really have no time or a chance to reflect yet on the separation because everything be do with such brutality with such scream and yell and right away there be the kapo and block elder who start to beat we into line and the ss with they dog , who be bark and they be train to tear anybody to piece if one do not obey they order , and so we be finally line up , and they march we to a huge bldg which have shower cap and we be tell to undress , and I be always , I be young ------------- , and I dress in my best clothes , my nice coat , my , my best dress , so I put it nicely together when I when I undress , and there come over this kapo , and she fling it to the side , and I say , `` this be my clothes . '' she say , `` yes , but you will not need it anymore , '' and , and I be terribly scared because I do not know what that mean . then when we be undressed , we be order , everybody be order to stand up on a stool , and they shave we , they shave we hair , and the private part , and they look , we could not even recognize each other once we be strip , not only of we clothes , but of we hair .", "but we really have no time or a chance to reflect yet on the separation because everything be do with such brutality with such scream and yell and right away there be the kapo and block elder who start to beat we into line and the ss with they dog , who be bark and they be train to tear anybody to piece if one do not obey they order , and so we be finally line up , and they march we to a huge bldg which have shower cap and we be tell to undress , and I be always , I be young ------------- , and I dress in my best clothes , my nice coat , my , my best dress , so I put it nicely together when I when I undress , and there come over this kapo , and she fling it to the side , and I say , `` this be my clothes . '' she say , `` yes , but you will not need it anymore , '' and , and I be terribly scared because I do not know what that mean . then when we be undressed , we be order , everybody be order to stand up on a stool , and they shave we , they shave we hair , and the private part , and they look , we could not even recognize each other once we be strip , not only of we clothes , but of we hair . then we be shove into those um shower , and they first open the hot water , so we be scald and we , as we run out from under the hot water , we be beat back by the ss and by the Kapos to go under the shower again , and so they open the ice cold water , which have the same effect , and finally we be out of this shower . each of we be give one garment , which of course , do not fit .", "um , however , the dress be eventually , since we sleep in those dress and wear they constantly , and uh , become full of lice . so , they would , they would try to disinfect , not that it help any . so we would , we would stand around naked while those dress be disinfect , the ss with they dog would guard we , and we would be nak -- stand naked while the ss be guard we with those dog . uh , sometimes a hour , sometimes 2 hour until we would receive we dress back . one , one day , after have , after such a uh , uh spectacle when , when the ss be , be guard we , they become very restless , and the blockelder apparently want to because she happen to be a very nice woman , want uh maybe to save we from some disaster , tell the ss that she have among she child a very talented girl , she be a ballet dancer .", "it be say about you that you be once a star , and you be privileged as to sing before the king . look at what they be do to this beautiful ballerina . they force she to dance naked like in some arena . you block out the present , and turn back a page , and you make believe you be on stage , and ----------------------- beep .", "he take out I and my mother , and we , we come out , and he rescue we , the last hundred people . those 10,000 people have a terrible fate . they take they all to nine Fort , put they in the fort in 100 at a time , make they undress in the underground , and they machine gun they . and uh , the lithuanian guard , the lithuanian part -- the lithuanian partisan , lithuanian soldier , machine gun they and then cover they up with tractor with earth , and earth have move for three day , with the tractor and run over they to squeeze out the last breath , and when uh the front come closer , and start undigg they , and the same prisoner , pl-uh russian and jewish prisoner be still there , they find lay there , mother with child wrap around together , and they die together in the common grave . the , you can imagine we , we , we hurt , we sorrow what happen in the ghetto after 10,000 people be take out .", "they take she away in Bergen-Belsen they do not take the people and burn they or put ` em , or bury they , they just pile they up outside of the barracks in front of we door , and the pile be as high as 6 or 7 foot of corpse in , in front of each barracks we live with the dead people , and this be where Christian be . and for day , I could not look at Christian because I know she be lay there , and one day , my guilt be bother I so because I know she be there and I would not look at she , I decide to go see she . and when I look up at she , I see Christian , but something worry I and puzzle I , and I do not know what be wrong , and I say uh , somebody steal she skirt , and she be lay from waist down , naked as a skeleton , which they call in Au -- in Bergen-Belsen be a musselman , which mean uh , before you die you be skin and bone , you look like a musselman which be a skeleton , and she be a skeleton lay there , and she have a navy blue jacket , but the navy blue jacket be not blue , it be grayish or white , and it puzzle I , I say , why would somebody steal a skirt and change a jacket from a blue one to a white one , and not take everything and just leave it there , so I lean over closer to the pile of the dead people , and there I see that Christian blue jacket be cover with terrible lice . the lice be a big as the black ant that you see sometimes in ground , and they be just crawl all over Christian 's body and the jacket , and , and that make that blue navy jacket white , and I could not take it anymore , I almost fall on the dead , on the dead people myself , I be in such shock . and I just run away because I , I be in terrible shock , I , I , I see the terrible lice eat she up , and it it be just too much for I to take , and I never look at Christian again .", "the woman , on the other hand , we leave a week later , and we be on , in the cattle train , of course , pack like sardine , and uh , we be go , we do not know where we be go , we assume we be go to go uh to Brinwitz directly . all of the sudden we land at this very famous now platform ------------ platform at uh , uh , uh station in Auschwitz with the ss run like mad people , with dog bark all over , and they start to push we out of train , and uh run we to uh to a selection , to a selection process , which be by itself terrible . we have to undress completely . I clutch , in those day I already wear glass , and I clutch they in my hand because I know if I do not have glass , I would not be able to do any work , I would not be able to to see very well , so I clutch , and thank God no one ever uh discover . some woman have they head shave .", "the lower uh floor , and then the upper be all uh have balcony all through the width of the building , and the door be open , the , the gate rather be open , and we march in , and as we march in , I see man in the striped suit uh you know , which we they do not wear in uh plaushow because in Plaushow one still could wear uh they clothes , you know . but , all , everybody be shaven . a group of man stand on the balcony with shaven head , with a so-called Lausen Promenade , which mean uh Lice Promenade , you know uh , uh shave , strip of hair , uh , uh , uh , uh of skin rather , completely shave , and they be wave to we , and , and cry and laugh . first they , they think that we be in a terrible shape because wear those rag first of all in which they never see we before , and before we leave Birkenau , they paint we with paint , like red , yellow , red or in order so that we would not escape during we uh journey . and I see among those man my husband , and of course , uh , my happiness have no uh , uh no limit .", "when they go without the fighting , they go with dignity . when they fight and they get kill , they try to protect themselves , but not uh like sheep , because be no way to escape , what a child can do when they take close to 60 child on the hill and execute they ? what the woman who can do when they undress they and they ask they to stay on the , on the side of the grave , and they shoot they with machine gun ? what the other people can do ? what the soldier in the , in the uh , uh , uh last winter of the war where they execute they by Gestapo when they be in french country , close to 150 american soldier be execute .", "and I tell the judge , `` if Hitler would come now and give he order , or somebody else , they would do it again . '' and , it be very hard just to watch , like winter sometimes come a transport , and they be busy , and they could not handle so many . they tell the people to undress , in the snow , in Poland it be very cold , in the snow , naked , and they chase they like , like cattle , cattle I think you take better care of . all the way to camp , straight to the gas chamber . let 's stop ...", "they choose we to go and work to the Breshinka or Birkenau , these be name you be familiar with . this be the place in Auschwitz next to the next to the crematorium , where people arrive , they go in and never come back again . most of the people that be doom to live in misery , they be give bath undress , they be very hygienic about the whole process because you have to remove you shoe , if you still have one , be give again the striped clothes , now I know what the crazy unit mean . we head be shaven completely , and when we approach each other with we ---------- , we do not really , nobody recognize each other . be ... after the selection , we be select again to this transport , which be unknown to I at the time , it be call the Zonder Commando .", "not that it help , but it be good for we . we , you know , we be not human being anymore . we , we be strip of we humanity , we dignity , we pride , we existence , but we have to have some kind , some sort of a strength within . this be some of we way of resistance . I know it be not much , but it make we feel like we be do something .", "what can I do for I , I ? well , it do not exist on the ---------- that way . there be some people that really undress from they humanity , and they give in to they animal instinct . there be a lot of we that do . and some hold on to this principle to hold on to you own strength and sanity .", "so on . but , almost immediately we realize that situation be different , because while we be stand in line , we already see ---------------- the previous arrival . those who be assign to work , naked woman , stand in line , and another group on the other side , naked man , it be at that point , extremely demoralizing , and we know that this be not something which be normal , and they be not , most who be , we see naked , be not older people , but they be all the one who be go to go to work , if not to gas , to be gas . it be very , every second be a different thought . everybody think it be something else , and uh , everybody want to believe it be something different , so that uh , we really do not know .", "and what have happen be that I have wash myself , I have a basin in front of a window , and know that school be not open in the morning , I do not think anybody would see I . besides they window be lower , so you could not look up . but , actually , a block and a half away , 2 street further , be a seminary , a religious seminary , a Roman Catholic church , and they have train , um , spyglass on we house , and they have watch I undress in my room . big deal . and so this man come , and we be very mad at this ... uh , well , say , prior of , the head of the Seminary that he have not call and call the police , I mean in those time you do not call the police .", "this be my own feeling . I may be wrong . I think that when you strip a human being of he dignity slowly , he be not the same person , and I think that in a certain way , what the Germans be do , by put we into a open ghetto , by take away some of we rights slowly , it be a conditioning that permit we to , it make we , that make we uh. , more willing , if I , maybe , more willing , more able to accept it . but , of course , I be a child , but I be think about my father because my father be a really , I think , wonderful human being , and , and , and intelligent . and I and I , and so be my mom .", "so the Germans know that there would be no train go , and so they do in three day empty practically all of , say that again , Westerberg , gee , I have a block . the um , in three day , there be only about 400 people leave from the thousand and thousand , so we be in the first train , which go as we find out , not when we come there , but maybe a day or two later that we be in Auschwitz . so the train where the regular , as I understand , the regular camp car , there be no seating in there , nothing , it be naked . and the only thing be the little um , a little thing like this for maybe 175 people to use . and uh , otherwise people , a tremendous amount of , of , of luggage .", "and uh , they put the name in the book , and maybe those book be now open to we , and uh , they give you the tattoo , and uh then you go to another part in this huge bldg , and uh , there be more of those woman . the same type , and uh they say very fast , very fast , be always fast , fast , fast , fast . we have to undress completely . and with that undress , I have a wedding band somebody overlook it there and she just put it with she hand out , and it be go . I still think they be german .", "the same type , and uh they say very fast , very fast , be always fast , fast , fast , fast . we have to undress completely . and with that undress , I have a wedding band somebody overlook it there and she just put it with she hand out , and it be go . I still think they be german . they be not .", "otherwise I would have just take they away from the --------- , but uh , they leave I alone , and I have those shoe oh at least half the winter , they be still , I mean I could wear they , but they be not so good any , anymore . but um , yeah , the next half of the winter , I have no shoe . but um , we , we be then , then uh when uh we be naked , and we get shave , we hair and body , and the head , and then we be bring into the shower , which be a regular shower . we do not know about other shower , and then we be outside . it be September .", "oh , wait a minute , before we go in , we be take in to be shower and bath because we be , I guess , full of lice and dirt . so , the clothes , everything be take away from we . we be take into a big hall , and uh , and the row kind of move on completely naked . and this be actually the first time that I have see my mother completely naked . and all the other woman .", "so , the clothes , everything be take away from we . we be take into a big hall , and uh , and the row kind of move on completely naked . and this be actually the first time that I have see my mother completely naked . and all the other woman . I , I , I have never see it , and , and , they be just stand there and kind of hold they hand together , and the Germans walk back and forth with they little um , whatever you call it that they be hit with , a leather strip .", "and this be actually the first time that I have see my mother completely naked . and all the other woman . I , I , I have never see it , and , and , they be just stand there and kind of hold they hand together , and the Germans walk back and forth with they little um , whatever you call it that they be hit with , a leather strip . if you do not move fast enough . and uh , we keep on move down the line .", "we be completely shave , and uh , keep move in line towards , that I later find out be the shower . there be a lot of cry from the people because , I guess they know that it might not be just a shower . uh , for I , I be shock to have see for the first time my mother completely naked . and everybody else around I . and they be kind of try to , to hide from all these german that be walk back and forth , and uh , disregard all this mass of , of , of woman , completely naked .", "uh , for I , I be shock to have see for the first time my mother completely naked . and everybody else around I . and they be kind of try to , to hide from all these german that be walk back and forth , and uh , disregard all this mass of , of , of woman , completely naked . uh , we uh , be uh , encourage or , or push into go into this room where there be uh showerhead uh in the ceiling , and water come down , and we be , we get we shower , and then uh , it seem to I , I do not know if I be right , we come out on the other side of the bldg. . we have to dip we shoe in some kind of a liquid to disinfect that too , so we be pretty clean once we get out of there .", "so , what be on we mind , what we share with the child , I do not share that with my mother , be find place where to hide . in Auschwitz , we be to hide . under a blanket , they would find it because they would strip the bed . uh , the um , there be nowhere to hide in the barracks . but the barracks , the barrack that be next to ours be a place where -- we have to reload .", "half of the people that we , that come with we , we do not see , we know they be gas . and the next day , all the woman that look elderly or the kid that could not , young , uhhh , work age , you never see ` em again . over there they strip we again of everything we have , and give we this uh prison clothes . and uh we be in barracks , and oh there be a bed here and a bed here , all the way through , and we to sleep . a couple day later , we woman come .", "and when I , when we meet in Vienna again you know , and uh , my wife be , we be actually liberate by the Americans , my wife be in a camp in Czechoslovakia . she get liberate by the Russians , and she come home ------ with a train full of Russians , but they do not do do not do no harm to she . but she be uh , she be close to not naked you know , she be sick all the time . she have two hole here and big hole here , and she have no stomach . and uh ...", "why not ? '' so I start run , kind of over the hill -- I run over the hill and there be lot of firing and go and then I see -- all of a sudden , I be kind of run on the border of a hi -- of a -- of a field . the border be kind of a strip of grass , it be higher than a field and I see right by my foot there , dust fly . and I do not think -- think much of it , but it be somebody shooting machine gun from a way , way distance there -- german machine gun and hit right where I be run , below my foot . it be several time , right below my foot .", "so I fall only in -- that way I get wet . it be not very cold , just about maybe 25 below zero . so two of they grab I and run back -- run to the -- back to the yurta where I be -- I strip . and he say , `` well , I loan you my suit . '' he suit be make of silver fox .", "go to the shower and go to you barrack . '' so I put my arm in there , tuck my ear in , go in . my finery be strip . my shoe -- my beautiful boot even be take . I be leave with a belt and a pair of holzschuheand my little bundle , which I stick in a -- in a holzschuh .", "my shoe -- my beautiful boot even be take . I be leave with a belt and a pair of holzschuheand my little bundle , which I stick in a -- in a holzschuh . get out of the shower and be throw prison strip -- prisoner garb . go back to the barrack boil mad and Mr. Bujwid come and he say , `` what be the matter with you , do not you know any better ? you could get I kill and yourself kill . ''", "I have to clean it up every day . '' 10:07:37 so it kind of abate , but he be still kill people . if he do not do that , when you -- do not like you or you get close up and the upper be kind of a steep road into the gate , front gate of the Grosse Tor -- he would take you hat , we have those strip beret -- he would take it and make it fly beyond the post line . and you have to put you stone down , everybody wait and you go to retrieve it . and that be a no-no , because it be beyond the line , and people up on the tower there would open up and shoot you .", "I mean he be just a bad person . anyway , there be a bunch of Russians who hate he , because he especially hate Russians , I do not know why , because he be a spanish communist and the Russians be russian Communists , but he hate they . so they nail he -- they strip he , they nail he to the barrack by hand and foot and they take a heavy machine gun and they shoot he to piece . and I watch -- when I be in the hospital I watch out of my window -- be -- my bunk be next to the window , I watch it . and I ask , `` who that be ? ''", "I pay -- and he pay for I a t-ticket , and I come on the plane from Berlin , and I remember they call I in . `` you be a smuggler . '' I have to undress , and they -- the British , that be what it -- the british part of Berlin . and they check I , they look for I . and at that time I figure , hey , I should have have like -- like with the german maybe , to put something on my leg -- on my -- in my -- so that they will not touch -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- .", "but we get use to be already . that time , we already have -- we have -- we call it - they have a -- a steam room outside , yeah . a steam room , you go out -- I -- I do not know , you go out of the steam room wintertime , almost naked , then you run in in order to get -- in order to get rid of they . it be a problem because , you know , the bunk you sleep , each time -- you never undress , you never take you shoe off . you only sleep on -- you know , like -- like a -- it remind I the concentration camp , you sleep close to each other and -- and you know , it be -- it be bind to get from this -- from the -- from somebody else or from the sand and somehow , get infested -- get infested .", "that time , we already have -- we have -- we call it - they have a -- a steam room outside , yeah . a steam room , you go out -- I -- I do not know , you go out of the steam room wintertime , almost naked , then you run in in order to get -- in order to get rid of they . it be a problem because , you know , the bunk you sleep , each time -- you never undress , you never take you shoe off . you only sleep on -- you know , like -- like a -- it remind I the concentration camp , you sleep close to each other and -- and you know , it be -- it be bind to get from this -- from the -- from somebody else or from the sand and somehow , get infested -- get infested . but we f -- we , from the experience idis we discover , we learn , you know , we get rid of .", "it overwhelm I , really , even though Vienna be a big city , but Antwerp be not , and all of a sudden everything be so big . all but we room . my mother and I have to stay in a little room and get dress and undress on top of the bed . but otherwise , everything be big . and in Greenville it be the other way again .", "I have to feed he because he would not eat and he do not want he wife or he two boy to care for he . he behavior be very strange . he walk out onto the balcony naked . he be jump around and shout `` murderer , murderer ! I want to give up .", "-lrb- be you brother and sister the same way as you ? -rrb- perhaps . in 1941 come the first soviet prisoner as they arrive the german make they run around naked to show the other prisoner that they be nothing special . the prisoner from the other barracks use to bring bread to the Soviets . the prisoner have to where different color to separate they .", "Q : be there any lesson to be learn from that time ? a : in Matthew 25 , it say `` do you feed I when I be hungry ? do you clothe I when I be naked ? '' we teach we kid the christian value . the way you love determine how you will be judge later ... .", "my father tell I to say that I be 18 although I be only about 16 and my profession be a gardener . the scream and tormentation from separation of family be the first really awful thing I experience in my life . they then take we to Bircanau where they be strip of everything which we be glad to get rid of . however , we do not get a shower and then we be give striped clothing or civilian clothing with red stripe paint on it . we head be shave , and we be tattoo .", "they tell we they be take we to brick lay training . we do not know if it be true but anything have to be better than the hell we be live in , or at least we figure it could not be worse . they disinfect we and take all we clothes and make we run from block 1 to 17 naked . Block 17 be a clean place . we could take shower , but the head of the block be Alfred Auschowski -lrb- p -rrb- who be a german criminal who kill he family .", "we could take whatever we could carry . a good friend have break he leg so we take a wagon from the washateria on which we put provision and then the friend with the broken leg and we push the wagon . I then decide I would strip off my zebra clothes and have on civilian clothes so I could pretend I be a farmer who could not wait for all the people to pass and have to cross the road . after 36 km I attempt to escape but be catch by a guard try to run away . the guard tell I I would be punish but noise in the back distract he and I crawl away .", "Became a alcoholic - drain sorrow in drink . as time pass more survivior come to town Girl and she brother come in and he direct they to a apartment . one day they find Jack drunk in gutter - undress he and put he to bed . wake up in poool of vomit - very embarrassed . start work for the Russians as a interpreter - job be interpret Nazis when they be bring in .", "so the simplest thing , they drop the h and make it into a very nice polish name , which be Wolinsky -lrb- ph -rrb- , so my name be Maria Wolinsky -lrb- ph -rrb- , or Wolinska -lrb- ph -rrb- for that matter . and my brother be Stefan always , so there be no problem , be Stefan Wolinsky -lrb- ph -rrb- and my father be Athol -lrb- ph -rrb- and my mother be Gisele . but , when we be -- you see , the -- munk\u00e1cs in that area be still the border , it be the border strip what they call , and then there be a post , a police post that you have to pass . and there they stop all the car and look and -- and you have to identify yourself , or whatever , identification . and at that point , when they stop we , my mind go blank .", "Q : you mention that you learn some thing on you own and you be successful in -- in you interrogation . and you mention one thing that they do not teach you be to have you prisoner -- a : Strip . Q : -- get undressed , right . what other kind of thing do you improvise ?", "a : yes . yes , yes , but my father be very religious so he say , what you want to go to Israel ? the girl and the boy , they get very , very -- the short pants , he say naked . we very -- we have to wait til mo -- Messiah will come , we will go to Israel . if my father would listen to I , we w-would say -- because we get money , we would able that time to show the 5,000 dollar and to go to Israel , but my father be very religious , he be wait for Messiah .", "he tell we right o -- he be a mur -- he be a murder -- er-er lagerfuehrer . so he tell we , we gon na do this , we ga -- he be -- we gon na be hang and be no more womens -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- Jerusalem poop . okay , he give we strip dress with the number , and he give we straw sack to put in new s-straw . so at least we get a -- a -- a straw sack with new straw to sleep . but britch again the same thing , britch .", "a : men and woman , but we be separate . Q : in this camp do you witness any beating or execution ? a : one -- one woman cut off a piece of -- from she underwear , I do not know , to make a -- a -- a strip around the head . so wh-when we come back , he tell we to stay , we can not go in . so I get towel because be very cold , so I take the towel around .", "and it happen that she go on the Exodus . she go with friend and friend she meet -- the same person Yehaskel -lrb- ph -rrb- benzef -lrb- ph -rrb- , wi -- they get on board and they be on the Exodus , when -- she tell I story , they come to Palestine , they have to go back . when she come back she be first in Aachen , and from Aachen she come back to Vidin -lrb- ph -rrb- , naked -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- because when he leave we buy she clothing , everything , she only have one dress , that be all . we have to buy she everything new again , and she be there -- end of Tape one , side b beginning tape two , side a Q : -- uation of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum volunteer collection interview with Morris Rosen .", "the -- first , be in the mountain , and be in a different level of the -- of the mountain . on the very top be Americans prisoner of war , on the very top . now , we be , when we come there , they first , they undress we and they change the -- the place , so if you have something you hide -- be hide , you lose , because they take you naked to the other place . we get the shower and then they give you a potato sack . and everybo-body need to go to sleep in this potato -- I be sure that this be the end probably , he will -- we will go to the potato sack and this will be the end , but no .", "Gold tooth , glass -- I mean glass , by the hundred of barrel fill up , tall one . and all those people go to the gas chamber , be take off all the stuff from they . then we come into the shower , we -- we dix -- take off -- cut off we hair , the woman 's hair too -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- and they give we strip -- blue striped , blue white striped uniform , and a number . you be gon na be -- live -- you -- this be gon -- you be gon na live by that number . you have get no name , you have get no origin , all you have be a number .", "Q : what happen to the stuff that you bring with you from the ghetto ? a : Th-They be t -- it be all take away at Auschwitz . every little thing they strip you of , even -- even you -- everything , even you hair they cut off , whatever you have leave . everything . Q : what happen to you parent and you brother and sister ?", "and we be wait there for a train to arrive to take we someplace . it be pour , it be rain hard . first when we get there , we strip all the bark from the tree . anything that be available , branch , we just eat . grass , whatever we can get ahold on , anything .", "Q : Right . a : but , if I have not see it , in my mind I still see it , with the thumbtack with a little bit of flesh on it , on one of the tack . and the handle be only about that big , and strip of leather about that big and they would just whip the prisoner with it . and I have the flag and I have the , you know , the bayonet I bring home , I do not know what happen to that . remember the bayonet ?", "they have a field day with they . but I would not say that anybody touch I , because I come , 18 year old , I weigh six -- 73 kilogram and then in about a year ya -- I become 82 and pretty athletic . one day my lieutenant see I naked , take a look at I he be oh -- he be a very short guy -- and he look at I and se -- say , oh how beautiful you develop . you know , I be athletic , I only need meat a little bit on my bone , you know ? but when you be short like Dick Teryoff and -- you be treat like a piece of dirt .", "a : no , not there . no , not there . there -- when we be inside , in the camp , they tell we to go in a -- a room , and undress completely naked . Q : but that be not right when you arrive ? a : oh , it be in the same day .", "a : oh , it be in the same day . Q : uh-huh . a : but it be in the camp when they tell we to take off the clothes and just put everything else in there and come out naked . then they give we -- a little bit later they give we what you call a pair of pants and a jacket . that be all we have .", "a : yeah , by then we have the prisoner ' uniform on . Q : ah , you do not get they as soon as you get to Auschwitz ? a : oh yes , that be what I say , you know , we have to be naked . we get that , but like I say , you know , we have it on , uniform , the first day we arrive in Auschwitz , they -- they change . they take all -- everything we have , civilian clothes and throw it in one box .", "we get that , but like I say , you know , we have it on , uniform , the first day we arrive in Auschwitz , they -- they change . they take all -- everything we have , civilian clothes and throw it in one box . and then they tell we to go outside and we stay there naked til they call and -- and give you they uniform , striped uniform . Q : and with these uniform you come to Warsaw ? a : yes .", "and you would know my father -- it do not really make any difference , but he be a persnickety guy , you know , alway clean every day , everything starched and everything -- you know , he be quite a old-fashioned gentleman . and , to think of he -- it be the first time that I see a model of the -- of the path that they have to go to get to the oven . and they say they have to go naked , that they have to take they clo -- if I think of my persnickety father , my -- my -- and my m -- it be -- it be -- it be unbelievable . I mean I -- I look at that and I would know it , after all . I have imagination enough .", "Q : what have happen to you hair ? a : well , we hair be shave , or clip . and in the middle of a he -- from the front to the back , there be a inch and a half strip that be all shave every week and they -- we use to call it Adolf Hitlerstrasser . if you escape from a camp , people could recognize it , you be a inmate . Q : when you be recover , be there food that you really want , but you be not able to have ?", "they ask a few people to take he -- take he across and they kill he right there and then . people who be in the hospital and it be sa -- in the hospital , they all bring they on horse and buggy down there and to come across the hill and they take he down there . they say they have a undress place . after I come -- after the war , after it be -- everything be do -- after I come , I find out all about they make a -- like a tree from -- from a -- like a -- a tree -- like a -- a round -- a tree -- a round thing with one entrance . and in the inside they ask all the people to undress .", "they say they have a undress place . after I come -- after the war , after it be -- everything be do -- after I come , I find out all about they make a -- like a tree from -- from a -- like a -- a tree -- like a -- a round -- a tree -- a round thing with one entrance . and in the inside they ask all the people to undress . some people do not want to undress . undressed -- I imagine they want still to save the -- the -- the clothes from the people to save for themself .", "after I come -- after the war , after it be -- everything be do -- after I come , I find out all about they make a -- like a tree from -- from a -- like a -- a tree -- like a -- a round -- a tree -- a round thing with one entrance . and in the inside they ask all the people to undress . some people do not want to undress . undressed -- I imagine they want still to save the -- the -- the clothes from the people to save for themself . to save or to give away or to whatever they want to do .", "to save or to give away or to whatever they want to do . so some people decide no , kill we with we clothes . but this be a undress place . be make out of brick , actually . like a -- like a -- a -- a round -- a tute -- a round thing and one entrance .", "like a -- like a -- a -- a round -- a tute -- a round thing and one entrance . and from there they take he by group and they kill he and they -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- . because one of we friend , actually be down there , naked . th-the bullet -- the bullet do not get he in between the dead . he run out , after mart , in the evening or -- or something , in the evening .", "they scow when I di -- th-they stac -- they stop in they track and they look at we because we look like -- like wild animal . like -- like something escape , wounded animal . I be barefoot , my sister be -- be barefoot , half naked . Q : be they -- they be not tell joke about j -- a : I do not know what the joke be all about .", "meanwhile or later , with -- anyhow , when we come to the main square -- the distance between the house and the main square be maybe about three quarter mile , maybe a mile at the most . but the sight between the house and the main square be the most horrendous . that be the real brutal -- naked brutality , as I be force to -- to -- to see en masse , the first time . because , you know , I see shooting here and a shoot -- beat there and all kind of thing I do see , but I do not see so many act of brutality up to that point . we be talk now about 1942 in October .", "that be the bad part . in the Shellneetsa camp , there be a little brook run through , so people would go and wash themselves , even in the winter . men would undress and wash they body in the win -- but in Mioufka , there be -- you have to scrounge to get a -- a basin of water and everybody would wash up at the same time , you know . it be -- lice -- lice be -- i-i-it w -- it be a plague of lice that be even maybe not as bad as in Auschwitz , but it be very bad . those be the two major thing , hunger and lice .", "you do not know if you be go to get even that meager nothing , that -- that slop , whatever it be . a piece of bread . you do not -- you could not sleep , you could not undress . you -- you -- that be the end of the road . it be just body shove into a tent , period .", "I have picture , as I mention before , where the -- the famous church on Coffersendam be all in rubble and I be stand in front of it and I have a picture with it . so that be the -- that be the reality of Berlin . it be not what you would call a german city , as such , because german presence be -- if at all -- little visible to the naked eye . Q : do you have any particular feeling about the Americans ? a : well .", "people only work -- the one that work be either in the kitchen , and I be not lucky enough , you know , to be -- to be choose to work in the kitchen , or they work by -- which -- they -- that be call Canada , where they sort out the clothes and all the stuff that be bring in by the -- by the people that arrive on the train , because everybody come with a suitcase of something . an-and some people have valuable still , I mean hidden , like I -- we have hide in one bar of soap , large diamond earring . but we throw away the bar of soap , because when -- when we arrive and they take we to the shower , you know , to be shower and we have to un-undress completely naked and they shave we all over and -- and they say , if every -- you can not have nothing with you -- you have to walk in just completely naked and you will not get back you clothes anyway , so I be afraid to have that cake of soap , so I throw away the soap right there and -- and I -- and I have nothing . but eventually , no they -- they take all these thing and they be look for , you know , for -- for valuable and people have sew in and some have in clothes , sewn in something , you know . so they have people work sort out and -- and finding and also take away the clothes , which be eventually ship to Germany .", "walk , mind you . and then , when we come home , she say , Father must not know about it . you go now , undress and go to bed and lie down . but at dinnertime I want you dress , sit at the table , eat dinner with you father . and this be exactly what I do .", "you stay in the kitchen and peel potato . and to this day I can not peel potato without turn my head away . when the ss would drop in sometimes , if they do not have any theater or any recreation they think that they will go , and all the woman , young or old , have to undress as God have make they . totally naked . stand in the row -- I have see it , and if -- they would look they over , and if they do not like a pair of breast , they would hit with the whip .", "and to this day I can not peel potato without turn my head away . when the ss would drop in sometimes , if they do not have any theater or any recreation they think that they will go , and all the woman , young or old , have to undress as God have make they . totally naked . stand in the row -- I have see it , and if -- they would look they over , and if they do not like a pair of breast , they would hit with the whip . anyway they do not like the back , they would hit in the back .", "I do not know -- they call the Americans `` the Armies . '' he put I back on the hay wagon , bring I to the town liebenau , to the Americans . first thing , they undress I and pour the brown , yellowish-brown powder , which I later on find out be DDT . only people who go through what I go through can understand all of a sudden the heat from the lice eat you body completely stop . all of a sudden the whole world stand still .", "and she give he the whole story , that she be on she way with she two girl , to this town , which -- which be not too far from where the killing wa -- be go on , to see she husband , who be in jail . and he believe she , and then he put we inside the slaughterhouse , we should wait until he bring in a translator , a ukrainian translator . and then , after he tell the translator to take we back to the city , we need clothing , we be naked . so , he take my sister , tell my sister to go outside , and they have mountain , hill of clothing , from everybody else . and so she pick whatever she think would fit I , herself and my mother .", "we buy we house from they , and I remember where my mother u -- my mother , my father , when we use to go visit they , and I would walk the same way , they be on the other end of the city , I -- you know , I do not remember exactly how long it take I to walk . but I walk , and I -- you know , I -- I go to she and she realize that I be s -- I be infested . so , in the winter -- it be already in the winter be very , very cold , she take I into she barn , undress I , take my clothes and hang it outside , so everything can sort of freeze . and she shave my head , and -- and she give I a bath and she put cream over my head , because I have , you know , rash . I have blood , ab -- just blood already , drip down my -- my head , because it be so itchy .", "so , they be help they . also , they start collect clothes . some people come naked , nothing on they . they start to collect clothes and give it to they and this be -- in -- in the evening . then , when we get organize , under Mr. Ponvi 's guidance and instruction , we get together and we rent a home , which we come -- on the ground floor be a synagogue , on top be office and a kitchen .", "and we see a house and we walk across the house and we knock on the door . and the woman open up the door and as if she know we be come and we be wear the striped dress with the clog and -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- the wind be howling , it be a big storm . and she quickly tear off , and we be now stand naked in front of she -- tear off we clothes and give we clothing and tell to the Russiansaw who be work there , he be a prisoner of war , that we be -- to take we to the Umschlagplatz to be kill . and that be where they take all the people , to the Umschlagplatz to be kill . and they give we some food and oh , I be so sick from just have the first -- you know , real food .", "and then they tell we to get undressed . the first one to get undressed be my mother . when I think of how many time she have to stand naked in front of those beast . she be such a beautiful , religious woman , gorgeous woman and have to be just like this , before they even kill you . what -- the humiliation that -- have to see what they be do to she child .", "and the other picture be of Ilsa Bruell and she two younger sister , Ruth and Lydia . and then there be that little -- pardon I -- that little pile of clothing . so I know that they come at night , and they be shoot right away , of course , and have to undress and they leave it there . now , when I come back to Boskovice , the father of the three girl , Karl Bruell , survive because he second marriage as to a Gentile woman . and I sleep in he house and he ask I when he can expect he child .", "do not matter , she think I -- we be in a -- in a quarantine with a kitchen . they give we ea -- a few of we , you know , l-live together in a room , and they -- they cook . we have like a -- a dinner time , and a breakfast time , and around that place be a beautiful lake , and you could swim in the lake , and I -- we do not have anything to -- to swim in , we be naked , swim naked . it be only girl . and -- and in the side be beautiful forest , and we use to go to -- into the forest naked .", "we have like a -- a dinner time , and a breakfast time , and around that place be a beautiful lake , and you could swim in the lake , and I -- we do not have anything to -- to swim in , we be naked , swim naked . it be only girl . and -- and in the side be beautiful forest , and we use to go to -- into the forest naked . and then th-the boy find out what there be girl swim naked . so they use to come with little boat , boat there , and -- and we do not care because the Germans see -- see we all naked .", "it be only girl . and -- and in the side be beautiful forest , and we use to go to -- into the forest naked . and then th-the boy find out what there be girl swim naked . so they use to come with little boat , boat there , and -- and we do not care because the Germans see -- see we all naked . but it still , you know , somebody i-in a different country , they see we .", "and -- and in the side be beautiful forest , and we use to go to -- into the forest naked . and then th-the boy find out what there be girl swim naked . so they use to come with little boat , boat there , and -- and we do not care because the Germans see -- see we all naked . but it still , you know , somebody i-in a different country , they see we . so we be sit in the water , we do not want to get -- or we run to the -- to the forest .", "and -- and they use to look we through , and they see I , and they call I closer , and they ask I in German , they speak german -- he be a engineer , and she be a -- a -- work in a -- in a office someplace , and -- and they be ask I where I be from , and they ta -- ta -- ask I all kind of question , and they say , `` I see you next time , '' and they leave . and next Sunday they come again , and she say , `` do you -- how you swim in that water ? '' and I say , `` naked , '' you know . so she say , `` okay . '' and -- and the third time she bring I a beautiful -- I have a picture in that -- a green bathing suit , to bathe in the bathing suit .", "by the way , I do not see the Statue of Liberty that day , it be foggy . but I feel , I want to start with zero . if I could ha -- cou -- dress completely naked , I would have do it , because I find out this my new life . it be wa -- the past , and I do not -- I do not want to dwell of my past . Plas be -- pa -- past be only history , so maybe it should teach you some -- but I can not dwell on it .", "yes , they parent , they grandparent be involve in all of that , as Mr. Goldhagen say , but this be my statement . I can speak German to a young person , and be happy to speak , and that I know how to address they and speak . but I can not speak to a person who be older than I , or my age , because that -- that language that -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- all of this here , yell , and -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- be only the way to confuse the Jews , and -- and make they -- first strip they from rights , then strip they from anything that they could , be that it be food , and they really -- kill out the intelligentsia first , so we be people that it be not enough left of the intelligentsia , nor enough left of -- in we , to be able to resist , and that be why we do not resist in as many -- more than it should have be . besides , the population be not that open to help we , but they would help the other , you know ? when they kid be take to Germany , and they do not like it , they help the partisan , because they can -- have where to escape .", "and he rattle off on this old bike , and th -- and -- and by that time , I al-always keep on talk about rattle bike . you see , we do not have any air tire any more . tire be make then either out of wooden strip , very cleverly , wound around with steel wire around the rim , or if you be a little bit better , old car tire be strip , the rubber -- solid rubber be then wind around , and so -- but you can imagine , within about a month , everything rattle loose on you bike , so they always rattle . anyway , my father set off , and he go to Barnfeld , and as he -- and now I will have to quote he , because he tell this later , also in the interview , he -- he -- he reach Barnfeld , and he go there into a building , and behind a rickety table , he find three older -- older man , yeah , three older , jewish man , and the -- and they say , `` can we help you ? '' and as -- he say , `` yes , '' he say , and -- and I be try to express this as na\u00efve as we be still .", "they arrest the girl , they keep they in a bunker . one of my friend , she be typing whatever they say . they take she -- I do not know how you call it , the strip ? what inside with steel , you know , strip , like it be -- how you call it ? a strip .", "one of my friend , she be typing whatever they say . they take she -- I do not know how you call it , the strip ? what inside with steel , you know , strip , like it be -- how you call it ? a strip . when you go to beat up something , you have a --", "they take she -- I do not know how you call it , the strip ? what inside with steel , you know , strip , like it be -- how you call it ? a strip . when you go to beat up something , you have a -- Q : when you be go to --", "a : the thing , yeah . Q : oh , you mean , like a whip ? a : a whip , yes , and they put in steel , and they beat they on the body , on the naked body , and a doctor be there to revive they , so they can get out of they . Mine girlfriend never tell anyone , and the four girl be hang , right in the -- we have to stay and watch . this be only four week before they evacuate from Auschwitz .", "Q : in these dream , be they -- be the -- be the dream make up of thing you actually see , or it be just sort of -- it put you in the place , and -- a : no , it put I in the place where I be stand for selection . we have to stay naked , winter , in the coldest day . if you have a little pimple on the body , you be go . that be -- one time they tell -- I work in ausch -- in Birkenau , I work by brick , with the tuchka you know , schlep brick ?", "they be lie . then they open up atellager in Auschwitz , or they take in kid like in a kindergarten , and all the thing -- they promise they all in the world , you see , if the Red Cross come , we have kid here , we have good -- everything be cover up , like in Theresienstadt , too . and then they take the people to -- to -- the -- the people be fight -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- bare naked . they say , `` you promise we , we -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- why you do it to we ? '' so they be beat up over the head .", "I use the word stupidity because it really increase we rank . people who have say , `` no , I can not help you , I be too frightened , not for I , but for my family -- what can I do to help ? '' and I suspect that in any underground movement , but I -- I only know Italy , when there be this kind of naked brutality , people will emerge , who will take far higher risk to help the victim than they have be willing to risk before . and the reason I feel strongly about the underground press , although I be not a journalist , but of course the Ritsini be a journalist family , pro-monarchy , I suspect possibly pro-fascist in the early period , but certainly against this kind of brutality , and they be a great help in understand that some conservative , from monarchy , etcetera , maybe proconserva -- they do not accept such brutality , and -- and have to -- have to the paper -- now , we worker -- thousand of people be to paste notice , and -- and oo -- at that time , we have to make -- to mix flour with water , and pinello , and go -- and that be very dangerous . and then distribute the clandestine press every place we could , in the fabrica factory , office , building , school .", "a : how ? Q : how be it that she be able to keep she clothing , and she shoe , and scarf , and garter belt , and even she hair ? a : I do not say anything about keep she clothing , we -- in Auschwitz we be give -- all -- whatever we wear , we have to -- they strip we , yeah . I would like to say that with -- you know , with the beginning of when they take we to Auschwitz , because there be a awful lot to it . but nobody have any -- they own clothing in Auschwitz , they take everything away .", "Q : and you find that out pretty soon after the war end ? a : more about after they end , because I get picture , and -- from people that -- that have bit of piece of -- from either -- I do not know how they have it , do not ask I how , but they -- they somehow obtain some little picture here and there . because we -- we be not able to bring picture or anything , cause you know , when -- when I arrive in Auschwitz , and they be take we to -- they say to shower , and this and that , when they strip we clothes , we -- we think that they be take we to crematorium . but of course , it do not happen , it happen different . so when they take we there , I have with I some picture , and money -- little money , which mean -- mean nothing .", "take , for instance , Demjanjuk . you know the story about Demjanjuk , that he be a guard in tr -- in Belzyce , he be the man who operate -- and in Treblinka , who operate the gas chamber th-there . now , Demjanjuk , he biggest pleasure be when they bring in the Jews , and they be naked , and they walk through the maze , to go in in the dead can -- t-to the gas chamber , to the -- to the room . Demjanjuk and other like he , be stand there laugh , and everyone -- every time when they see a young girl , with the firm breast , yeah , they go and cut off the breast , or stab there . Al -- it be a -- it be a joke .", "so the -- a -- and from treblinka they have also revolt and escape . from the escape on -- 600 escape , and how they escape . not from the people who have to be kill , from the people who be the permanent prisoner , who do the undress , take out the gold from the tooth , and from the 600 , 40 survive from the -- from the 600 , cause on the -- fr -- through the time they be kill . there be even a story that a polish group , two polish people find 12 people from Treblinka hide in the wood , and they kill they . and when after -- after the war , somebody denounce they , and they be take to court , and they get -- those two get three year jail for kill the 12 people .", "not very much pay , and I -- my mother-in-law get I a job with a designer , Suzy . Suzy with a designer , design sweater , and skirt with feel appliqu\u00e9ds , it be very much in fashion . sell it to Saks , and everything -- and we have a store on the strip . and where we live be , we live near the strip . it be between the strip and Santa Monica , and at that time the strip be the place .", "Suzy with a designer , design sweater , and skirt with feel appliqu\u00e9ds , it be very much in fashion . sell it to Saks , and everything -- and we have a store on the strip . and where we live be , we live near the strip . it be between the strip and Santa Monica , and at that time the strip be the place . there be the -- the mola -- th-the larue , there be the Mocambo , Ciro , everything be there .", "sell it to Saks , and everything -- and we have a store on the strip . and where we live be , we live near the strip . it be between the strip and Santa Monica , and at that time the strip be the place . there be the -- the mola -- th-the larue , there be the Mocambo , Ciro , everything be there . and that be the place there , a main shop , and the factory downstairs , and I work there .", "Q : -lsb- inaudible -rsb- a : for instance , when we arrive in Ravensbr\u00fcck , we be subject to the medical exam . we have to be strip naked in front of the man there and put on the chair with leg up , I never see this . they be look for valuable , and -- and they be laugh because we be virgin , few of we there . this -- it be very humiliating -- humiliating , degrading experience , that she would not want to hear , and she want to spare I , le -- do not think about it .", "he have the gun , ammunition , clothes , boot . he be dress . my father be strip naked , strip from he dignity , totally dehumanize , take to the gas chamber , starve -- first starve , tortured . I say , my father do not have a gun to turn around and shoot he -- shoot people who be put he in the oven . you father do not have to join the army .", "and he give I a good kitchen -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- over there to most -- to bringe in -- the plane come into -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- and the man be empty the train and a little bit poor worker three-quarter dead people come for the soup there too , and I work there . and that time they bring from Germany , from -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- from Czechoslovakia , from -- the most from Germany , Czechoslovakia -- we get someplace else ? no , Germany , ch-Czechoslovakia , they bring in the Jews , naked , barefoot and the german Jews be not use to a life like we get in Poland . they get all convenience , they get beautiful life . I be there and I see .", "she be the worst woman I -- I -- mengele with he helper , I will remind my name . he be wear white glove to here , not deep , short glove . he get a little stick in he finger and he turn around like this , we have to take off the dress , naked . he look over the body , if we do not have anything on the body . it be two side , he say -- sec -- how you say , select -- sele -- one on this side , and one on this side .", "Q : Sulfur , like sulfur . a : yeah . so they give we a bath there and they give we again dress , again big -- I do not know , one 's get a dress til here , naked the bottom . I get a dress til -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- . they give I a pair of shoe , I be suffer still to-today .", "so girl behind I be pull my short little hair , but I do not pull , I do not care , I be not go away til I dra -- have to get a few drop of water . okay , I be sit , sleep , sit , we be travel a few day , maybe a week with no food , with no water , with nothing . we come to a place -- we come to a place , so he give we strip dress . he give we straw sack and straw to make like -- like mattress . Q : Mattress .", "she understand I . I take the t -- I take the towel . so he give I do not know how many with a rubber pipe on she two muscle , naked muscle . the cut be deep more than a quarter of a inch . this woman be scream a half a night , the rest of , I think she die .", "it be like on a little hill and the soldier have use that and it be destroy . my grandmother 's home -- which be my aunt 's home who come back , stand . the home be totally strip of everything inside . there be nothing but wall and window leave . and w-we move into this home .", "and -- include my aunt and we all live in my grandmother 's home . when we come back we have no money , we have no food and we just have the clothes on we back . we neighbor have strip we home , we furniture be use by neighbor . we recognize some of we clothes that be wear by some of we neighbor . but no one come , no one offer and no one ask .", "Q : mm-hm . a : and w-were suppose to enter a receptacle with water with the shoe on . and the next thing be tell to strip naked , and the hair be shave . the hair be shave everywhere on the body by man . and how -- the first impression that the man be there view these woman body , and -- and th -- the fact that in such circumstance that be -- that be the first , strongest impression of that time .", "and from there we go to , we be deport to Kaiserwald-Riga , and in Kaiserwald-Riga , my memory take I to a very terrible scene . we already know , I mean , we already know , even the child that there be gas chamber . and they take we and they undress we and they say we have to go into the shower . not shower . for the people already know the shower be not shower , but gas .", "now , how those three woman escape electric wire , I do not know . but they do . they could not find they , and we be punish , 12 hour naked in cold weather , and additional punishment be they take out 4 or 5 and I do not remember how many woman , and in front of all the woman that we stand in a row , you know , they rape in a rape that I have never read or see it , not in a movie and not on the television , and certainly you can say that we have a terrible television with all kind of story . and to see those young woman rape by the man there with stick , and my mother be near I and she take she hand and put on my eye , I should not see for the first time sexual intercourse . I have never see sexual intercourse .", "I do not understand . a : this be ... they go to my father , they want to shoot from the roof . so my father say ... so , my father say , `` man be bear naked . let 's go . '' so we take a wagon and a horse , and the maid , who be live in the city next to we ; and we go to Breslau -lsb- Pol : wroc_aw -rsb- , where my grandparent be live .", "and he help I to get in in the Technical Department , which be ... Technical Department be a group of about uh a hundred painter , mainly hund ... hundred . it be about engineer , main ... mainly these uh engineer and painter and draftsman . so would ... would be there in a way consider draftsman and painter together ; and uh uh what my job be to uh to uh to prepare everyday statistics ... take statistics take for the Kommandatur to uh ... these be uh ... we have to ... on small strip , we have to write down how many people do receive certain amount of food , how much and so on . uh , statistics also who die , who do not die , how many be live and under what condition and so on . just statistics .", "un later on many of those thing be hide but uh at that time it it it be alright . the statistics have to be deliver and everyday on the german komandatur ; and uh at the time the the leader of the the german main , the uh the uh how could I say , the main leader of the german be uh be Seidl . but the uh unpleasant thing be deliver all of the of the strip , the statistics to the Kommandatur , to uh ... and ... and what happen one day , uh about seven people be call because uh they either get from outside some cigarette , or they write letter . and those seven people be uh be hang . and uh I have at that time ... in the morning , i. .", "in November he still have no clothes and at one point he be so sick that we get a letter from he . when I say `` we , '' again it be the two lady , get a letter from which they forward it to we where somebody else write in he name he be too sick to write the letter himself plead for some warm clothes . as it turn out , somewhere in the month of December he plus many other people be line up , we find out through the through the underground later , be line up at the railroad track there in s ' hertogenbosch and be strip of all they clothes and be put into cattle car stark naked and transport clear across Germany . to where ? nobody know .", "to where ? nobody know . 02:03:00 it be obvious to I that he never make it because you can not be naked in a cattle car which be , you know , all open from all side . and in the middle of December and not die , especially if you be in weakened condition already . so I do not know what happen to he .", "we have all these clothes and everything . so , you know what we do ? we undress and we share we clothes . mind you , three people -- everybody have something different of a different size . we take everything that we have on and give it -- share it with the people who be in the barracks because we know that we be go back the next morning and the girl tell we , `` do not be afraid to leave those thing to anyone you want to .", "we only know story that people be be gas and that they be shower head to make believe that it be a shower room . so , from this point , we be drive into that room with shower head in it . if I remember correctly , we have to undress right then , or maybe before , right after the registration when we reach the next step . it be not quite vivid in my head , you know , and we have to be undressed . Q : can I interrupt for a minute ?", "I certainly do not say that I be a administrator or a law student . I say I be a welder , and he direct I to one group . I have lose track of my wife and my son , but then also what I see and what be completely new to I be all of a sudden woman in ss uniform with with they pistol holster , you know , where they ... the pistol uh dangle , and they also prepare ... behave like animal , and they uh uh uh be especially busy with the woman with child and the elderly and then we see uh and I see people in in a certain uniform I have never see before , with strip clothing and peculiar kind of a of a of a cap , and uh so then truck uh be be drive up and one group of people , especially the woman with child and the elderly be put on one truck and we still have to wait and uh then this truck leave and it so happen that my wife and my my my son have ... they be sit or be stand at the end of that truck , and my wife be somehow wave to I . and that be the last I have see of she . we have to wait and then be be be press into another truck , and though we think it be full already they they uh they still push I do not know how many people into ... it be less ... it be worse than sardine .", "so uh that be the moment when when we have arrive and I have arrive in Auschwitz . what happen to my wife and my son I do not know . the other do not know what happen to they people , so and then we be order uh to descent this truck and and and uh be drive into to to some barracks and be order to undress completely , only to keep we we shoe , we glass certainly , we belt and uh then the ss order we to take off we ring , we watch , whatever ... and uh uh then we be be ... I together with these other people and we be approximately I would say two hundred people in this in this group , from Berlin ... uh be be lead into a shower . we be not quite clear what what it be . it be cold .", "I say at this time to myself , register in you mind whatever be go on . with God 's help one day you might be be be call to give evidence about that , so somehow I I try and not to forget and uh then we ... after that ... in that ... then we be in that shower . a man come also with a uniform , with a strip uniform , and we ask he who be you and he say I be from Hamburg . I be a political prisoner , a jew but a political prisoner . I have take part in the uh fight of the of the spanish Republicans against Franco .", "now you have to understand we later realize that we be walk into some kind of a military pocket ... the Russians in the back of we and the Allied army in front of we , and uh in the middle of the night it be ... no , not middle ... it it it be just get dark ... the russian gun really uh send they shell and they come they come closer and closer , and almost threatening and at this moment I say to my friend ... we ... I see some of the polish people , polish political prisoner we have in we area , say well , this enough , we run . and I say to my friend , I think this be also the time for we to run , so we leave the the the fire and we leave the horse meat and we leave whatever ... but just whatever we could grab , especially a blanket or so , and we run towards a road . the ss be still there and when they see we or see we run , they be still shooting after we , but luckily uh we name tag be not on they on they on they bullet , and then all of a sudden uh we reach a area ... meantime it have become dark , where we be we be somehow in no man 's land , but not completely because on that road we have to reach , there we see the the remnant of the german army , also try to make they way to the north , and refugee obviously come from Berlin with all kind of vehicle , fire truck , hearse , milk truck ... whatever move , they have use , and sometimes put together because they do not have enough gasoline anymore , so they have tie ... have tie these together , and we then say well , probably the safest be to mix with these people , and after all , I have throw away the the the the strip coat and I take ... have throw ... not throw away but put it my pocket the the cap , so I I look at least like a civilian , and my friend also whatever they have . we mix with the the population , and uh so they walk rather slowly . there be no march because there be hundred and thousand of people , press towards the north .", "so that now by this time be get dark . now , remember this be end of October -- no , end of September -- in Poland . so they march we first where we have to undress . now I have a can of oil and a can of sardine in my pocket . and I have a good swiss watch still .", ". there be woman from the ... you know , prisoner 's woman , but who already have short hair . and we have to undress . I think I will be very smart . I go to one of they and I say , `` look , I put in the corner my watch and the can of sardine and the oil .", "that be my maiden name . of course , I never see she , I never see anything else . we be allow ... we be suppose to strip completely , except keep shoe . so I have my ... still my good shoe . uh , we come to the next building where there be a shower .", "the shoe be the last thing I already have . I skip one step . as we come and we undress , we have to go through a hallway , naked except in the shoe . and ss come by and look at we breast and look at we belly . if none of we ... if some of we might be pregnant .", "if none of we ... if some of we might be pregnant . if they see anybody pregnant , they pull they out . so you know , it be ... so we be stand there naked ; and they come and they look at we breast and we belly . then we go to a room where they shave we . and I remember see sit there one of the people I know with long hair and at that point half of she hair be shaven and half be still long .", "we do not have anything . we be just as we be bear . and as we be stand there naked wait for the shower ... these be these portable shower , you know -- again cold , no soap , no towel , nothing . we come there . these young soldier , ss man , come and look at we and say ... one come to she very kindly and say , `` one of we have to shave . ''", "so we go there . it take year and year before I finally allow myself to remember why he do it . he stand in the corner and watch five young woman naked take a shower . he get he jolly ; but , you know , it take I year to allow myself to remember why he do it , because it be very dangerous for he . uh the Antonio Pezutto -lrb- ph -rrb- , he sometimes bring I a piece of bread .", "Q : what be it like for you to into these camp ? what do you see ? a : well , I be sure that everbody by this time have see the photograph of what the camp look like and body lie in the dust , naked , a little item of clothing on , many of they not move , some of they stir , mostly bone ; human being , man weigh fifty , sixty pound . the medical troops come in at the same time , people be be hose down with the hose hold up with one hand and I have do that too -- hose they with the hose hold in one hand and hold up a man in the other hand who weigh about 40 or 50 pound and be nothing but bone . and then of course the pile of body in front of the crematoria stack up like cordwood , and on the on the cart that be drag they to the crematoria , these open cart just load with body , hand and arm hang out on all side .", "you know , and I roll he into the ditch . so there be a upsurge of the inmate themselves on a rampage . as soon as those gate be open , they go on a rampage and any German who be within reach , rue the day , you know they strip they home , they rape they woman , they burn the house down you know . so there be many who be quite capable of still work and think and talk , and those who seem to be knowledgeable and better educate , I try to catch they immediately and have they give I a statement you know , what have happen , where they come from , describe who be in the camp , what the circumstance be , describe some of the torture mechanism which exist in some of these camp -- chain , and wall against which they shoot people , and people be throw on the wire and all that . so there be a ample field for credible reliable testimony from the inmate themselves , and I collect those wherever I could .", "they do not have the -- they be not strong any more . and we go out only from the room for awhile . it be soon winter , we see big mountain of dead , dead naked body around the corner of the -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . we return . I try to take a shower every day , as bad as it be , as cold the water as be .", "she take all my clothes off , and put in the stove , yet it be bong , bong , like the lice and everything what -- and everybody do it , yes , some other girl come in . then they take water , they boil the water and we wash ourself . then we take some clothes there that be in the house because we could not stay naked , of course , and we could not use the old uniform -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- . then come -- we be already cleaner , a little bit , it come to feed myself . I remember Rachel bring a -- a piece of bread .", "Q : on stretcher ? lay down ? a : some on stretcher , some si -- you know , in the gown , undress , in the gown , sick people , load they to the truck . and infectious one they use to kill and throw on the truck . and then I see some -- Dr. Rebach be a jewish with a white coat , he be load , and my father be load to the truck .", "but he have be -- he -- he really organize the torture in Oslo from the very beginning . and I know he have , for instance , tortured woman . he do it in a way that put they in a cold room , and then they be naked , and they be put in cold water , and they be just -- try to put they under water , almost til they die more or less , that be the terror , real . so he have be a terrible fellow . all the people that I would be torture , the -- all the torturist , be shoot in Norway .", "but I be ask she question , and I forget how the sequel go , because I do not attach that much importance to it , but I do notice that she have a good stack of american cigaret -- cigarette brand -- american brand cigarette , loosely , not in a pack , but i-in a tray on she table in -- in the prison . and in the course of question , she -- I ask she where she get those cigarette and she have no hesitancy at all in answering by just open she robe . and I find out she be ab -- absolutely stark naked underneath the robe . which be unusual prison garb also . and then I put two and two together and I say , `` let I see if I have this figure right .", "I say , `` go ahead . '' and she say , `` I think if God save I up to now , he will help I with that baby . '' she come back with a naked child , about a three-year old boy . it be very scared . but the woman who leave it there -- I find out later , too -- figure nobody will notice the child .", "and I be kind of walk around in that yard , and get in a corner where the ... the fence , the barb wire fence , be uh braid with coniferous wig ... uh , twig . and I hear woman cry ... and yell ; and then when I look better I could see through . I see silhouette of naked woman , run . in the meantime that fellow who beat the other fellow come to I with he whip ; and he say , `` get out of here . it be not good to be nosey . ''", "and I question she farther , and she get tear in she eye and run away . well , it seep through to I that actually what happen ... the people , as they arrive , -lrb- sigh -rrb- they be sort by sex . they be tell to undress , to tie they shoe ; so that they would not be mix up when they go into the bath to be disinfect . and then they will get fresh clothing , and they will be go to some job . what actually happen when they ... after they undress , they chase they into the gas chamber .", "they be tell to undress , to tie they shoe ; so that they would not be mix up when they go into the bath to be disinfect . and then they will get fresh clothing , and they will be go to some job . what actually happen when they ... after they undress , they chase they into the gas chamber . and that be what I have notice with these woman . and Mrs. -lsb- Rotter -lrb- ph -rrb- -rsb- go with that baby there , after the speech of the german -lsb- nb : Oberscharf\u00fchrer Hermann Michel -rsb- that there should be a woman with heart who would save the child .", "they bring in a transport at night , a small transport , I remember at one time when I walk ... go to get something . but that be already in the early fall ; but I would not like to forget it on that episode . while I be walk through the yard where the people undress ... . and by the way , later on they build also a barracks where the woman be put in . and there be a group of what they call barber who go into that barracks and ... and ... uh ... cut the hair of all the woman before they go in to the gas .", "and I drink and I eat , and lie down on the ... that be a home weave carpet . this be make out of rag . you tear the rag into strip , and then you braid it between the ... waft -lsb- nb : weft ? -rsb- , I believe , you call it in English . it be not bigger than maybe a good yard long .", "a : beep . Q : of course we , we have some very good and very close friend among we neighbor , and uh , one woman , she name be uh Frau Resher , I remember , she come in , and she ask where the polish flag be . the polish flag , of course , be uh , a strip of white and a strip of red , very long strip , and my mother say , `` why ? '' and she say , it be really very easy to make a german flag out of it , you know , all you have to do be um cut out around um thing of the from the white and then pose it on the , on the red , and then with a ribbon , make the swastika , you know , I , and my mother absolutely turn pale , and the woman say , `` we we better make that flag and fly from the house , you know , obviously she want to protect we because uh , the house which do not fly uh the swastika flag uh be under scrutiny , and uh , they figure that they be you know , anti-german , and they discover that we be jewish so uh , she just take the flag , my mother look for it in all place where she know she could not find it , but finally she do produce it and uh , and she do make , my mother do not , but the neighbor and another one make the flag , and uh , and it be sort of unbelievable to see uh that flag fly from my childhood home . I remember I think of it like a spider , you know the swastika sort of reach out to , to engulf we , and uh , be a horrible thing , something that be suppose to be for we protection be actually terribly ------------- particularly , you know , to a young girl , and it all come so fast , it be all , within a day .", "she be the mother of one of Israel 's most decorate hero . tragically , the person who play Ilsa 's granddaughter be not alive , just as ilsa be not alive , and neither be the face that I remember look at ----------- . we perform it on the one naked , very d ------------- walk ??? in the clearing between the bunk . and it be probably , in retrospect , one of the most rewarding moment of my life , I have be able to make they forget , even for a hour .", "I get out . I remember only all old man - they have to take all they clothes off , we really be mistreat . Ralph and I be take to another room where I have to undress and where they see if we have anything hidden . when I come out of that room with Ralph there be a man who say , `` I be jewish . I live on the other side of the border .", "there be relative of my husband-wonderful people - get she to stay with a doctor . later , be it 1942/3 ? my sister have to work , she be strip down to 80 pound . she write a farewell letter . there be gentile people in Ortho where my parent live , a butcher and my boss , they be not Nazis .", "Q : do you believe it would end , be in there ? a : faith make I believe it would end . they drive we naked from the barracks for 300 foot . many die from the cold . I want to get to the important thing since we have little time leave .", "Q : Either one . a : with the body and , you know , ready to be cremate . we be show the gas chamber and the stack of body , naked body so high and the cart or wagon fill with they in addition to the stack on the ground all around . then we be take to one of the nazi administrator 's office , probably a commanding office , I be not sure , and they point out this lamp shade make out of human skin , and it be a terrible thing . I be about to cry .", "at the time we go there , I believe there be three of we nurse and the chief nurse , she go there for some reason , we go along with she , and we happen to be at the time that they be -- that the Americans have this camp , they be issue clothing to the inmate . there again they have they striped uniform . I suppose because they be issue -- we be issue -- the Americans be issue clothing , there come the man sort of in a column come in to get they clothing , and they be stark naked , not a stitch on they . they come in where we -- three or four woman be , and they smile , and they act as if they be clothe , _____ + clothes . and we have to look at they as if they be clothe , smile at they and , of course , we do not speak German , they do not speak English but , you know , the -- probably some handling which -- you know , all that -- as if nothing have happen , and we be tell that these be political prisoner ; that some of the best mind in Germany be probably there , but they be not politically correct , and yet what grab my attention be that these man do not seem to be aware -- of course they be aware they do not have clothes on , but they do not seem somehow to acknowledge that .", "it be a half island . its name be OgygiA : there we escape from Athens , and from there with the help of the partisan , we pass by sea to Turkey , and from Turkey , we go to Syria , and the city name Halab . and there exactly the English troop defeat the Vischi Government , and they catch we like illegal immigrant and take we to the Gaza Strip in Army camp , and then come the jewish agency , and we escape , and we come to Tel Aviv like illegal citizen . Q : I be go to ask you to go back a little bit , and just give I a little bit more detail . a : okay .", "you must have some ticket that you can come , and we be not legal . we be illegal . so they catch we , and they put we in the camp , british camp in Gaza Strip , and from there , we escape with the help of the jewish agency . Q : now , when the british catch you , do you have false identification of any sort ? a : no , no .", "so they take also Halab , and we be -- become a few day after the occupation of Halab by the british soldier . so they ask who be you , and we say we be illegal citizen , that we come from Greece , and we want to go to Palestine , and they say okay . they take we , and they bring we to the Gaza Strip . it be a very big English camp there , and from there , we escape to Tel Aviv . it be June ' 44 .", "MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN No to Kobe to Kobe excuse I . to Kobe . MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN only remember very 10 distinctly just talk from the personnel in the train 11 when the train leave -- or when we leave the train the moment 12 all the russian attendant or personnel they strip down 13 they uniform and we see that in reality they be all 14 russian soldier and not just train personnel . this 15 remeijer very very distinctly . 16 so on the 27th of September shortly after 17 six oclobk we arrive in Kobe Japan .", "then there be a doctor for look in the eye . there be a dentist that look in you mouth . and of course they want we to be strip to the waist because they want to take we I guess we vitals . anyway , I be not about to do that . I be too ashamed to show my body .", "I take my clothes and run down the stair and I do not want to do it . so then the teacher come over to my mother and she say do you know that you daughter run from school and my mother say no , why would she do that . and she say well she do not want to undress . and my mother say , well of course . she be very shameful of show she body you know .", "then we talk to the man . he sound as normal as anybody else . as you and i. well the reason he be in the insane asylum be because he have take a dip in the river Seine and he be naked . it be evening and he do not think anybody would see he . well lo and behold , they get he and they say anybody that do that have to go to the insane asylum .", "there be palm tree , all right with coconut on they . and the Filipinos would climb up the tree and throw down the coconut for we . and we could crack they open , but first they have a green hull around they which have to be strip , but they all carry knife , bolo , you know . and so like hatchet , big hatchet thing . oh very vicious look deal .", "a : not in the beginning , but there be a man , man be escape , and he tell the story , and we say that he be crazy . Q : what do he tell you ? a : that they tell you to undress , and to take a shower , and sit in water and gas . Q : do you try to run away or to hide or to somehow escape ? a : no , no .", "but there they have set up a whole -- a arrangement for disinfect and clean people up and so on . and then the other side of this place there be clean ambulance which be go from the -- from this place to the new -- to the new establishment . so that there be a kind of a insulation between the disease and the lice and everything that the people , that the camp inmate have , that be all wash off and disinfect and strip of they clothing and wrap in a clean blanket . and then the other end of the -- the other side of the building , they would be load into another ambulance which take they to the -- to this new establishment . so you have one series of ambulance go between the camp of what they call the human laundry and another series of ambulance go from the laundry to the new camp .", "every border stop be a stop and the official come on board . well at that time , this be late 38 , the german of course , the Nazis come on board and search , question , very body on the train . I do not know at the time what strip search mean . I be a little past 12 year old and I find that out in a big hurry . because of a matronly german woman take the woman aside and strip search they .", "I do not know at the time what strip search mean . I be a little past 12 year old and I find that out in a big hurry . because of a matronly german woman take the woman aside and strip search they . I be one of they . and if anybody have ever be strip search and especially by a angry , german official of the Nazis , strip search a young jewish girl , you can imagine what that be like .", "because of a matronly german woman take the woman aside and strip search they . I be one of they . and if anybody have ever be strip search and especially by a angry , german official of the Nazis , strip search a young jewish girl , you can imagine what that be like . not pleasant , not nice and without get graphic very nasty and impersonal . it be one of the most unpleasant experience that I have personally and I think that be all I be go to say about that .", "I be dread the trip back home because I have not even get there yet because I be afraid that I would have to go through that again . but mercifully I do not . they be very thorough about check we luggage , check we personally but this intense strip search be not repeat . but it be go out of Germany to Poland . why they do not do it on the way back quite in that manner I do not ' know .", "and I say to myself , `` I do not stand a chance . '' this be all you head , you be talk to yourself . I do not stand a chance by go down , because you have to take off whatever you wear and parade through they naked . and if they like the way you look , they put you one way and if they do not , they gas you . so , I say , `` I be not go to give they satisfaction .", "the only thing I remember , he be in a big place , sit on a bench and this police truck come to pick he up . and it be about ten , twelve police man . and when from the witness friend who be with he , who survive , he be almost naked . he fight so much , and he be so strong . and this be the last we know about he .", "can you imagine ? today you can get marry if you be ten year old , I think . so , he go , short , right after , they strip he of he uniform and he go to labor camp . and I stay there with my grandmother and every night , I sleep somewhere else . some other relative and by he friend , because everything happen during the night , that they be look for people .", "so they could not help they . nobody could help they . and the Germans do not know what to do with they , so they let they make they own grave , naked , like we in Auschwitz . they take the clothes away , they put they on one line and on the order . they make a big , big grave and they have to make the grave .", "when we go to the restaurant then , I do not know what be the surprise . my aunt 's friend be there with she husband and she say she would never forget it , what I do for they . because they be naked . I be , but my aufseren -lrb- ph -rrb- and the forewoman , she let I take out clothes , because I tell she that my aunt be in the next camp . and she let I take out clothes .", "he be a friend of Paul Kaufmann 's , I think , and have be very , Kaufmann have put some people from Kentucky on he Board . he want this thing to be more of a regional program because there be so many of the issue be common to the Central Appalachia , and that the state line really do not mean anything . the strip mining problem in Kentucky and West Virginia be the same . unregulated strip mining , land owner have they land tear up without they consent , and that sort of thing . so , I go down and talk to Harry Caudill .", "he want this thing to be more of a regional program because there be so many of the issue be common to the Central Appalachia , and that the state line really do not mean anything . the strip mining problem in Kentucky and West Virginia be the same . unregulated strip mining , land owner have they land tear up without they consent , and that sort of thing . so , I go down and talk to Harry Caudill . there be a woman , here on Mud Creek they be do a lot of , they be have a lot of problem around health issue .", "she be a wonderful person . they ... Joe be bear here in Floyd County , and he be part indian . we talk a lot about they history and the problem that he see , poor people , and that people be get run over by strip miner . because Kentucky 's court allow mining without , strip mining without land owner approval . because these out of state mineral owner have come here in the late 1890 and buy out all the mineral .", "they ... Joe be bear here in Floyd County , and he be part indian . we talk a lot about they history and the problem that he see , poor people , and that people be get run over by strip miner . because Kentucky 's court allow mining without , strip mining without land owner approval . because these out of state mineral owner have come here in the late 1890 and buy out all the mineral . we be talk about country people and be acceptance of outsider .", "ninety-two percent of the vote , people vote for the Broad form deed amendment , which show people know what they be do . in fact , I remember when , early when we have be here not too many year , the Courier-Journal I think do a informal poll . and something like ninety-three percent of the people think they should not allow anybody to strip mine you land without you consent . but I be then , one of my , the coal industry decide they want to challenge the constitutionality of that constitutional amendment as violate the federal constitution . because they claim that mineral ownership rights have be establish by these series of Kentucky case in the Supreme Court over the year and that people when they buy mineral rights expect to be able to legally surface mine .", "and at the trial court , one of the attorney who be here then be handle , handle that case , and it be on appeal and it come to I and I take the case over . and we end up argue the constitutionality of the amendment in the Supreme Court . and the Attorney General argue in we support and the court then agree with we theory that they never have the right in the first place to grant the right to strip mine . so it take a lot of year , but finally the right be ... you can not today surface mine anybody 's land without they consent . Q : when do that final decision come down ?", "and a year go by and nothing happen , so he sue they to get he money . and actually in that suit someone , a deposition of he be take . and when he sell that property he say , `` I will give you the mineral and you may mine that property , but I want you to leave all the walnut , chestnut , and hemlock tree over ten inch , '' which make it impossible to strip mine . and so we actually argue initially it be not a Broad form deed , that this deed specifically be limit to deep mining because it be impossible to strip mine , because he have say that . and on deposition , which be ... the deposition from he testimony be still in the courthouse .", "and actually in that suit someone , a deposition of he be take . and when he sell that property he say , `` I will give you the mineral and you may mine that property , but I want you to leave all the walnut , chestnut , and hemlock tree over ten inch , '' which make it impossible to strip mine . and so we actually argue initially it be not a Broad form deed , that this deed specifically be limit to deep mining because it be impossible to strip mine , because he have say that . and on deposition , which be ... the deposition from he testimony be still in the courthouse . and in the deposition he reassert that , that he want those tree leave alone .", "but afterwards the corporation build and develop about twenty-five new home , Farmer 's Home own ... put up new house where the old one be , have deteriorate in one of the holler . it be a very nice , attractive town now . it be sort of the Appalachian , we have this big battle over a strip mining permit at one point . there be a large block of coal leave underground . I say strip mining .", "it be sort of the Appalachian , we have this big battle over a strip mining permit at one point . there be a large block of coal leave underground . I say strip mining . there be some strip mining attempt that we be able to fend off . but there be also a large amount of coal that have not be mine because they hit water in the mine .", "there be a large block of coal leave underground . I say strip mining . there be some strip mining attempt that we be able to fend off . but there be also a large amount of coal that have not be mine because they hit water in the mine . there be a attempt to re-open that , to start , to get a permit to mine that block of coal .", "and so we oppose that permit and there be a lot of community pressure , a lot of help . and thankfully that be , we be able to fend that off . but we have be very much , you have have deep mining and strip mining and coal truck traffic , all the problem that you see all over , in one little spot here in David . you have the craft co-operative as a little , as a new , which have become fairly successful . it be a nice community .", "those be philosophical issue that be hard to grapple with . that be why I say , now that I be share a grant with a judge . I sue that judge , ten year ago in a strip mining case , he be in the Service . and we have have a couple of knock-downs , but he want , he be very ... I think he , you know , he be like a lot of other political figure , but he come up the hard way and he want to see this be a better place to live . and he be willing to invest he time to try to improve housing and clean up garbage and do thing that bring in industry .", "but it be a case that go on forever . and finally really be resolve in a very favorable way for the client in that housing project . I be think , another , when we talk about the effect case have , I represent a group over from Pike County , who , they be suppose to strip mine above they , they be go to strip mine this holler above they home in Poor Bottom off Maribone Creek over in Pike County . and the family be worry that the strip mine be right over they house and that the rock and boulder be ... so when we look into it , we learn that there be deep mine workings that have be work out inside the mountain and that if they strip mine around the front side , they be in danger of hit those old deep mine workings which be fill with water . and the water would then potentially be a real problem to the people down below .", "and finally really be resolve in a very favorable way for the client in that housing project . I be think , another , when we talk about the effect case have , I represent a group over from Pike County , who , they be suppose to strip mine above they , they be go to strip mine this holler above they home in Poor Bottom off Maribone Creek over in Pike County . and the family be worry that the strip mine be right over they house and that the rock and boulder be ... so when we look into it , we learn that there be deep mine workings that have be work out inside the mountain and that if they strip mine around the front side , they be in danger of hit those old deep mine workings which be fill with water . and the water would then potentially be a real problem to the people down below . it just could come out in gallon and wash away house .", "and she be home and she go to the hearing with we . and they could not find , we be the only folk that could represent anybody because it would cost a fortune . there be no lawyer around who would represent this community to try to stop the strip mining . it have actually already start . I have a wonderful expert , a guy who have be a inspector .", "and actually a experience that have a favorable outcome . the administrative judge say that we be right in that they have leave , this information about the water in the old workings be not on the permit application . and that he consider it to be a danger to the family and they stop the strip mining operation totally . Edith Easterling a wonderful person , a remarkable woman . and I do not know until after be in ... and sue go to law school and have a difficult time as a Appalachian student for a couple of year .", "she have organize that little holler . and it potentially be a really serious problem . we do a lot more strip mining work than we have in recent year because some of the lawyer who work for we be now do that in private practice . I just recently represent somebody in Letcher County , whose name have be leave off , they property have be leave off a mining map . they just leave they off because they do not ... and they know , they know that she own the property that they want to mine and that she be not go to let they mine .", "it be one of the case that I do . and then we stop they from go any further and the state agree that they should not do that . so I do not know , I be just think back on Elsie Dale and the people you get to meet in these case , who have to be pretty gutsy to stand up against pretty moneyed interest , who pay big buck for lawyer and who hire people in the community , who hire they ... I think one of these folk have a son who be a truck driver for the same company that have mine , that be mine that strip mine . you be always run into that , that sort of situation . but in every one of these case , you know , whether it be in legal service or it be the discrimination case like Fannie Lou Hamer , and the people who ... Eulah Hall always remind I of , you mention Eulah Hall .", "Q : so he burn the money ? a : we burn the money , it be a lot of they , a big bag and crisp bill on a -- I -- we all encourage he to do it because it be a raid , hey , you be part of -- part of the czar or something like that . so it affect we also , it be confiscate -- I think be -- my dad be very well like , but I think also confiscate because I have to go into a sort of a -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- have to strip naked and nurse be sit there and boy at 15 , I be sort of intimidate . and they decide that I should maybe not continue with -- with school , I should go some sort of a trade . and I think be also a -- also be because my dad be well-to-do .", "Q : okay , and that you will have to go to a central place ? a : right , and there be freight car , you know , like freight car and we get in Stutthof . Stutthof be on Leipzig , a concentration camp , and we have to strip -- Q : now , di -- be you able to take any -- a : no .", "Q : Men and woman ? a : -- man and woman . and then we have to strip and we go to -- Q : now , be you with you father ? a : I be , my father and my brother .", "it be not gas chamber , obviously . and in camp we sleep three or four in a bunk to -- Q : oh , you have to strip and then what ? a : and then they -- they take away everything and I think they give we the clothing which be striped , you see the concentration camp . I think they also cut we hair and have a l\u00e4usestrasse , as you know , he cut you like the Marine Corps , but the middle one be sort of a strip they call the l\u00e4usestrasse , which be -- in german mean the street for lice , but you -- like prisoner , you know , be just a big strip in -- in the middle and assign we number .", "Q : oh , you have to strip and then what ? a : and then they -- they take away everything and I think they give we the clothing which be striped , you see the concentration camp . I think they also cut we hair and have a l\u00e4usestrasse , as you know , he cut you like the Marine Corps , but the middle one be sort of a strip they call the l\u00e4usestrasse , which be -- in german mean the street for lice , but you -- like prisoner , you know , be just a big strip in -- in the middle and assign we number . i-i lose my name . Q : do they give you a tattoo ?", "Q : and do you know how long that be , on the train ? a : well , I do not know , in Germany it be probably a couple of day , at least . and there again , they strip we , and they take away the shoe . even before that they take away the shoe because I have a broken toe . a big broken toe .", "another thing happen to I once . I come back -- I be 16 and very skinny , and use to have selection . selection be you strip half naked and a gentleman say -- there be left and right . selection be very sensitive -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- among people who be in concentration camp . and somehow I size up that he send I with the weaker one .", "he do say that a war start . Hitler invade Poland , and a mobilization be in order and ... uh ... he be the latest news from the Burgermeister 's office , Mayor 's office , I would say . and he advise to glue in strip of paper on the window so they should not shatter if the bomb fall down , and that be the news . so people start to pick up newspaper , cut it in strip , and glue in and some people do prepare dry bread ; and so it be in we place too . and later I remember plane come .", "Hitler invade Poland , and a mobilization be in order and ... uh ... he be the latest news from the Burgermeister 's office , Mayor 's office , I would say . and he advise to glue in strip of paper on the window so they should not shatter if the bomb fall down , and that be the news . so people start to pick up newspaper , cut it in strip , and glue in and some people do prepare dry bread ; and so it be in we place too . and later I remember plane come . I remember polish plane shoot down , and the next I remember my family be move out from the town , hide in a village from the bomb .", "02:08:02 anyway , they take we to the ... uh ... uh ... ss office where Gestapo be over there . stryy -lsb- polish : stryj -rsb- be a big city and there be one Gestapo be there and there be about five Ukrainians . they tell we to undress . we undress . and at that time one ukrainian hit I in my throat with the fist and I be start to choke and when he want to hit I again , the Gestapo man start to yell at he , forbid to hit .", "stryy -lsb- polish : stryj -rsb- be a big city and there be one Gestapo be there and there be about five Ukrainians . they tell we to undress . we undress . and at that time one ukrainian hit I in my throat with the fist and I be start to choke and when he want to hit I again , the Gestapo man start to yell at he , forbid to hit . Yah .", "but there be a german immediately . she resist , she be beat . and one person say ... have see she be beat , volunteer to give up the handbag and they lead they out to the exit gate , and later they go to a yard where they be tell to undress . 03:16:58 and we ... we group be still wait in this barrack , even when the people go through . but five minute later , the nazi call we to the yard where the people undress .", "and one person say ... have see she be beat , volunteer to give up the handbag and they lead they out to the exit gate , and later they go to a yard where they be tell to undress . 03:16:58 and we ... we group be still wait in this barrack , even when the people go through . but five minute later , the nazi call we to the yard where the people undress . be undressed , but now there be no people ; but heap of clothing . they tell we ... the nazi tell we to ... tell we to pick up the clothing and take it to the storeroom .", "I look down , but I do get once a whip so I pick up my head and take the ... the shears and he tell I I do not need to cut close . just ... uh ... uh ... if I have somebody have a pigtail , cut the pigtail off . and there they be suspicious because the Germans tell they , when they undress before the Germans tell they that they be go for a sanitary reason to a barber to ... to ... , but ... uh ... some suspicion . but still they do not think they be kill . as a matter of fact , I be sure when they be in the gas chamber they do not believe it .", "a : it be a chewing tobacco factory . Q : and what be you duty ? a : well , when you chew -- when you make chew tobacco there be this -- take two people , one if -- one that lay , dry strip of tobacco leave , they kind of small one . and then after they go the fellow who put -- I do not know what it be , but they put -- they cut up the tobacco , put it in some kind of prune juice to make it sweet , and then you go and you -- a-and you put that stuff on top -- no , behind he and he go and he take a piece of this horrible chewing stuff and put it on the leaf , and he roll it into it , and it come like a little sausage , continuous sausage and he just roll it in . he get to the end of it and he put it on some kind of wheel and the thing start anew .", "they probably be . Q : do you see any Jews when you be live with this family ? a : you can tell , that everybody have a strip -- and most of they be political because they di -- they have red triangle . so -- Q : so you do not see yellow star ?", "and so the fellow say well , you know , if you do not mind , you know , they -- they have polio here in Holland . if you do not object to you child be expose to that , then why should we , and he sign it , give it to he . so he come back to the border and there we be , everything have be strip and take and it be quite late by then . and the -- the Germans be furious , of course , that he have come up with the certificate , they do not want he to -- do not want to give he that opportunity that -- to leave . and even though it be very late , the -- and the dutch border supposedly have close .", "my father at that time , if you be 16 until 50 I think it be , you be not allow on the street , you would be pick up and transport to Westerbork . Westerbork be a city close to the german border . you would get strip from you clothing , and they would give you another ID , and you be then transport to a factory in Germany . to heck with that . so , we -- we get food every day to my brother .", "and that be why we know that wi -- they be , you know , send to th-the west coast , that be -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- , and that be the -- the area where the underground have the -- settle , and there they have to leave all they fur coat that they be snatch , and -- and radio , and whatever . all -- all the luxury stuff that be steal , they have to leave it there . and they be -- they be -- I think , but I -- I can not be sure about it , strip from all they whatever , paraphernalia , on they arm , because of rank , and stuff . so they walk for two or three hour , to they country , as a private . you do not notice if a colonel , whatever .", "see , a dutch person do not want to make a big deal about some event . it be all hush-hush , and underground . so , if they be pick up , I think they uniform be strip off first , and they look like a normal person again . that be what happen . so , if you meet a person , then you have no suspicion that -- that be not a dutch person , but he might be a german .", "for example , when the sic -- six day war come along in -- in 1967 , be that a -- be than a important event for you ? a : it be extremely important , because we -- we feel -- I feel that they liberate the land that th-the -- that the Arabs feel be they land , but if you go back in history , a lot of it belong to Israel . and even now , the dispute about the Gaza Strip , and other area , you know , that belong to Israel , but Israel be not a state . it be Palestine , and -- there be a conflict , of course , and I hope they -- they will have a peace tre-treaty , and try to live together , and they will be much better off by -- they do not have to love each other , but at least they should co-exist . by co-exist , the Arabs would definitely benefit , and I think even Israel would benefit , have peace , not have to arm itself , and lose people , you know , and -- which be completely a waste of human life .", "I do not know for what charge , whether -- they mostly young people . they be -- they bring they on open truck , because they -- they bring it up to a hill there . and what -- what they do be they beat they , and they have to undress , and they be all -- they -- during the day , they -- every -- they be excavate trench , you know ? maybe a hundred people excavate the -- prepare for load , and then they bury they , cover they up . so that wa -- they excavate the -- again , and burn they , you know ?", "but they participate in one thing , all of those -- of those who -- who be able to speak out . they mu-must remember how they be -- how they be perform -- not perform , transform from be a civilian into a inmate . they remember , even if a little bit , and not everything , how they -- what happen to they when they be strip naked , when they be shave , yeah , when they be register maybe , yeah . then drive into a barrack , and all those basic thing , they have remember they . Q : right , right .", "Q : and what about underwear ? panties ? a : those who have strip clothese , there be -- there be under -- underpants , not very -- very sexy one , but there be underpants , and some kind of a undershirt , and the other , the jewish prisoner , who wear dress , or whatever , they -- they be allow to -- to wear a -- sweater , under the dress . Q : under the dress ? not over the dress ?", "Q : you still have picture of these time ? a : yeah . and I -- we catch a couple of Nazis then , that -- the german population turn in some guy who be back , and we -- have to undress they , and -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- the uniform and put in some prisoner 's uniform , and turn over to german police . and I even put on the german uniform , which I think fit I , and get a photo of my hand up , and boot on the -- -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- fun with the company . we do not have any -- any duty , or any work , although we participate a little bit in the kitchen -lsb- indecipherable -rsb-", "I go to see the doctor , be a german -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- in Washing , who have be take prisoner in Africa , by Rommel , Africa corps . no , he be in Africa , but he be take prisoner by the British . I start undress for he to examine I , he say , `` we be the same age . '' and , `` you be in a concentration camp ? '' `` yeah . ''", "you could right away notice that they be not - I mean , you could not tell they you be polish . they all know that they be jewish . so , they say , they , so , there be eight of they - they - they be anti- Semitic , but they say , `` we be not go to kill you , but what we be go to do ... '' they tell they to undress . they leave they eight people naked , the way they be . they take they clothes away .", "they all know that they be jewish . so , they say , they , so , there be eight of they - they - they be anti- Semitic , but they say , `` we be not go to kill you , but what we be go to do ... '' they tell they to undress . they leave they eight people naked , the way they be . they take they clothes away . he say , `` now , wait for the Russians to come , for the other army - for the people 's Army .", "he say , `` now , wait for the Russians to come , for the other army - for the people 's Army . they will take you . '' but , and they laugh and laugh that they leave they alive but completely naked and take away they clothes . so , they be there and they start think , `` what be we go to do now ? '' I mean , they can not move .", "he be come out of the wood nude . a : and you know , may I say something on the tape ? he say it in jewish he say to he - I will say it in Polish because my jewish be not too good - he say , `` you be lucky that you be naked because when she see you , she fall in love with you . '' but those be the circumstance , and this be a real true story . Q : unbelievable .", "Q : so , she get to see everything long before most people . a : that be what he say . he say it in jewish , `` you be lucky that they undress you because otherwise nobody would have accept you . '' but he be a very good look man , and he be - he live in Sao Paolo in Brazil . Q : but , you think he do not know she last name ?", "Q : have 14178 . a : yeah , I remember that we have number one after another . Q : when you get - you remember get striped - all of you get strip ? a : all of they . Q : do you then get a patch to sew on ?", "a : yeah , we be go to - I do not - in Birkenau , in another section , where they have a place where most likely they be take the inmate - I call they inmate - regularly , once a week or once every ten day , whatever time , you know , and we be go to those thing to have shower . so , I do not know how often I do that , I do not remember , but I think once a week or once every ten day . when we arrive there , we undress , they take we clothes , they put it through the same function , like they give we - okay , what they have to do to put this stuff to disinfect all the dress . so , they give we - they take another bunch that they already disinfect from another group , and they give it to we , and we have a new dress , but each time it be a new old dress . each time , I have to fight to get the longest , but I be very lucky .", "he put everybody out because we have like a long , they call a barrack , a long , like , a factory make from brick which the people what they come before we they build themselves -- they make the people build this barracks and there be very primitive -- there be no quarter , nothing . just be , just like to shelter from the rain . so he take everybody out from the barracks with very big reflector , very big light , naked , completely naked and you have to hold you hand up . that mean , you could not have nothing hide , and with very big lamp , look over you and he have a left side and a right side and we never know , which be the good side -- the left side or the right side . they say , people say , between they that when the selection some people what they take it out , they go to go to the crematorium .", "she have gallbladder operation in the ghetto , and she have a open wound . the scar be not completely heal . well , when she be naked , I be afraid they would see this , they would send she to the gas chamber . so , I do not know what to do with myself . put she in front of I , then she would be send to the gas chamber .", "I say , `` thank God , everything would end . '' and I look on the shower that the gas should come out and I see water be come out . we be naked . all the dress be out . how can you believe it ?", "Winter , 40 degree , wet , everybody grab a dress and when it come to I , I do not have a dress . everything be take . there be ten girl leave naked . they probably grab two dress . no , they say grab -- some people want to survive .", "they probably grab two dress . no , they say grab -- some people want to survive . I be leave naked with ten other girl . then they start to whip we . we have to run to the barrack naked .", "I be leave naked with ten other girl . then they start to whip we . we have to run to the barrack naked . when I come to my barrack naked , we be stand and shiver -- no clothes . O.K. .", "then they start to whip we . we have to run to the barrack naked . when I come to my barrack naked , we be stand and shiver -- no clothes . O.K. . then the stubabba -lsb- ? -rsb-", "so she come over and she bring all ten of we a quilt to cover . so we do not know what to do . should we lay down on the mud or cover ourselves , or should we put it on the mud , the blanket , and lay naked ? they always use to take I in the middle , because I do not know why . I must have look terrible , I must be very thin or something because they always say you go to freeze to death .", "we put the quilt on the mud . I , we be stay five day like this . naked completely . jf : all ten of you be like this ? SA : all ten of we , yes .", "SA : No resistance whatsoever . I be tell that there be a few people that they bring they there . there be one girl , she be in the show business from french , and they tell she to take off the clothes , naked . so she take the gun from the german soldier and she kill he . but she be bright , fresh .", "these photo be never recover . after I be tear from my family , S.S. soldier with full equipment and police dog escort we to the bath house . we be take into a large hall and be order to undress completely naked . we be to leave we clothes on the floor . after be undressed , we be take individually to another room , where we be examine and search again .", "we learn to live with these unbelievable atrocity . after the six week of quarantine , instead of the normal head count , we be make to line up for another selection of those who would be pick out to die . we be order to parade naked in front of two row of nazi officer . we find out later that the head of the nazi officer be the infamous Dr. Mengele . he wear white glove , and with the movement of he wrist he hand motion either to the right or to the left .", "and there be like jewish policeman , a sanitary committee it be call , and they be also there . so I say to they , `` go to the family . let they give I a shirt or a coat ; you can not take out naked people . '' Q : this be everyone in the hospital they want to take out ? a : right .", "I be alone . my sister , my brother-in-law , and my niece go to Auschwitz a day before I go , and then after the selection , we be take to out bath . we be undress on this side , take a bath , and go out the other side . on the other side there stand a table with some dress , and a dress be throw to you . I have a black dress , a long black dress .", "so , whatever we be wear , pants -- tear , not tear -- shorts , long sleeve shirt , a belt and of course the wooden clog -- which the girl wear it now and enjoy it so much . we never take it in to sell because every time I look at it I think , `` my God , my God . '' so we have to take it and tie it together ; we be completely naked . that be the end of 1944 , in December , and the snow be three or four or five foot high . they close the barracks and explode bomb in the barracks .", "Q : cauldron . a : yes , and we throw we clothing in there . then when it boil -- meanwhile , we stand naked for a whole night and a whole day -- then they take it out from the water and they throw it on the roof so it freeze . then they pull it down from the roof , and we have the number , besides on we , on we jacket ; in other word , you be a number , you have no name , you be call a number . then you take the frozen clothes and you take they apart , and it break , it tear ; you put it on because it be yours , it have you number and everything , and we be leave with one leg and one without ; you have half a shirt or you have no shirt at all , it fall apart completely .", "if not enough die in a specific time or not enough be shoot in a specific time and it be get overcrowded they just bring a truck , pile they up on the truck , and take they to the crematorium . this be a daily routine and you get so use to it . it be like a doctor perform a operation , it be nothing ; you sleep with the dead and you eat with the dead , and you lay near they , and you be like a animal , strip of everything . you only object be for food and for survival , and after the war that be the thing that most of we think . I must do it , I must survive and tell the story .", "the forest have Germany and Poland on both side , full of they . and in the forest when it get dark we see a lot of Germans , officer come in and take off they uniform and change into civilian clothing . now a lot of boy -- and this my husband tell I many time -- get shot because they have take the german uniform because they be naked and they want to warm themselves , so they put on the german uniform and the Allies mistake they for Ger -- man by the end of the war and they shoot they . I be liberate May 8th . now at that time there be already some camp that be liberate .", "in order to save my skin , not to lose my leg , they have take a knife , and cut the shoe off with my skin , together . they have no bandage . she take a old sheet , rip it in strip ; she put on some salve . she say to this young man , `` do not worry , you can leave , and I will put she on a sled and take she back , '' because she think it would be too traumatic for I to ride a horse 35 mile . `` I will put she on a sled , and I will take she back where she belong . ''", "the only thing what we know , when the people come in from different city where it be more dangerous than by we , so they come in , so they tell , `` the Germans be do this , the Germans be do that . '' one tell a story , the Germans come in he house and he have a beautiful daughter . they tell she she should undress completely and stand on the table , and they make with she all different exercise , and he say it be terrible for he to see . so , all different story what ... we hear . lf : what you be tell .", "lf : it be important that you talk . GK : in January , it be in the month of January , I think it be 1943 or 1944 , I do not recall exactly , anyhow , they want make entlausung -lsb- delousing -rsb- , general cleaning . so everything we have to take off , naked like we be bear , and we go out , outside , and in Poland January outside be not like here . there be snow at least four or five inch high , and completely naked without shoe , without stocking , the whole block be then stand . who be inside , so they warm up , one to each other , the back to the front .", "GK : in January , it be in the month of January , I think it be 1943 or 1944 , I do not recall exactly , anyhow , they want make entlausung -lsb- delousing -rsb- , general cleaning . so everything we have to take off , naked like we be bear , and we go out , outside , and in Poland January outside be not like here . there be snow at least four or five inch high , and completely naked without shoe , without stocking , the whole block be then stand . who be inside , so they warm up , one to each other , the back to the front . and who be outside , around , so you make a round to stay close to each other , that we should warm up .", "and , I do not know how they could do this . now you would ask somebody to go out , you do not know what mean winter , because here be no winter compare to the winter in Europe . and to go out naked and to stay for a hour ... that we be not freeze stiff , frozen , with this food , the nourishment what we have , only what we have , maybe , the foundation what we have at home . I do not know , it be a miracle . it be just a miracle .", "those three man , you imagine the feeling that we have ? we be so nebbesh -lsb- helpless -rsb- for the other , but we feel good ... ashamed to tell you , but it be like this . we could cool we body on the wet window , the window be wet from the heat , and the wetness feel good on we naked chest . and we have to sew on those Mogen Dovids on the prisoner ' clothing and the number . everybody on the floor , one after the other , have to sit up , have to take off the jacket , have to give it to we .", "180 Jews angetreten zum -lsb- fall in -rsb- to Appell . ten death lay next to we ... ten dead . naked . I do not tell you everything , do not think , if I can tell you everything , we stay here until tomorrow . I can not tell you everything .", "in this little bit water , would not let they get out , hit they on the head with the iron part of the shovel . Q : when you be work in these field , be you still in those german uniform that you have be give in Sachsenhausen ? a : no , in Dachau we become -lsb- get -rsb- strip uniform . Blue and white striped uniform . pants the same .", "Q : how long have this be since you arrive at Dachau ? a : maybe a couple of month later ... maybe May , or April of 1941 . suddenly we see far away naked woman run ... it be far away , but I could see it be woman , naked . run for the S.S. ... the S.S. be stand and they be run ... be a selection of woman ... far away , of the same place , but far away . I do not know what happen to they .", "run for the S.S. ... the S.S. be stand and they be run ... be a selection of woman ... far away , of the same place , but far away . I do not know what happen to they . but we could see the naked woman , and we be stand naked , for hour , and then the sun go away , and ... it get cloudy , you know . the sun hide under the cloud . under the cloud we start to freezing , you know .", "to heal we , or what , we body . they put we on those straw , burlap bag with straw and we have to lay there a whole day , do nothing . only like naked . they give one to another shirt , I do not know what it be . every two or three day they come in , with some salve and we have to , a black salve , and put this on we body .", "so my sister say to I , `` please , quick , take off my earring because otherwise they be rip through the ear hole , '' and we have to give they away everything that we have , the rest of we little few belongings . a few picture we have we have to turn in . we have everything we have to leave in one room and then all naked we go out into another room , and then they give we the striped uniform with a wooden shoe , to go to work . NL : you sister work in the same place ? mp : we work in the same place .", "when we come there to the kitchen the guard search I and another two girl , and he find the two potato . so I be punish by give I 25 with a rubber whip on my body ; 25 time he hit I with a rubber on my body , and then I have some hair grow back . so for punishment and to dehumanize I , he make I here like a strip , to cut like a strip , so one side be a little bit of hair and the other side a little bit of hair . NL : this be a german ? mp : this be the Germans , the guard , the Germans .", "on this ship be people from the Kitchener Camp , which have be empty , and all these people be intern . the Kitchener Camp be the refugee camp establish in England to receive those who have come from Buchenwald and Sachsenhausen and other concentration camp , on they way to America , as a transfer station . however , not only be we treat very badly on this ship , people have they life 's belongings with they , document of book they have write , jewelry , anything of value be strip from they . the luggage that they have be open up , and partially throw into the sea , partially the soldier take it for themselves . those who protest be roughly handle , and we finally get on we way .", "we be examine by a doctor . I be 13 and some . I be menstruate the second time in my life , and I have to walk naked in front of this doctor . the indignancy -lsb- indignity ? -rsb- of life .", "my father say , `` they do not know they french . it be anday -lsb- chuckle -rsb- . that be we last exam in ation , by Gestapo and border german police , because France , you know , be theirs and a woman be body strip and body search ... a jewish lady . and she be in a hyster ical state . my mother quietly explain to I what they do to she .", "and all these little kid keep jump on we train ask for cigarette . and then we arrive in Portugal . not in Lisbon , but at the other end of this long , narrow strip of Portugal , I guess . it sort of ensconce that part of the world there . it be at the left end of Spain , it be a long strip and that be Portugal .", "not in Lisbon , but at the other end of this long , narrow strip of Portugal , I guess . it sort of ensconce that part of the world there . it be at the left end of Spain , it be a long strip and that be Portugal . and we be let out in a little town at night call Pampelhosia . np : yes , would you know how to spell that ?", "and air hose to get air down there . there be no air . so you have to undress , and you have to do you , you everything . we have a. . .", "I do not remember . anyhow , when we be there , a plane come by and it be a little wood , not much . it be a big field and a , a field -lsb- unclear -rsb- set in a strip of wood . that be where we be there . a plane pass by and all of a sudden drop spray with , I do not know if it be bomb or a machine gun .", "not predominantly , but there be , eventually wind up to be two , two , forty and eight freight car full of woman . so , we get on what be the last train , the last convoy of prisoner that get out of Paris . and we be five day on that train , part of which we car be naked . and we , and that be , that be another scene that be humorous , because it be a little tragic . ninety-two man in one forty and eight , all naked , with nothing but can of sardine and the equivalent of a large pretzel can as a toilet .", "and we be five day on that train , part of which we car be naked . and we , and that be , that be another scene that be humorous , because it be a little tragic . ninety-two man in one forty and eight , all naked , with nothing but can of sardine and the equivalent of a large pretzel can as a toilet . and we be naked because we manage to get six prisoner out of we car , escape . whatever have become of they , I do not know , but we do get six out .", "and we , and that be , that be another scene that be humorous , because it be a little tragic . ninety-two man in one forty and eight , all naked , with nothing but can of sardine and the equivalent of a large pretzel can as a toilet . and we be naked because we manage to get six prisoner out of we car , escape . whatever have become of they , I do not know , but we do get six out . a patch in the floor , of the car .", "and none of we have ever , what be Buchenwald ? but we soon find out once we get in there . and we be immediately strip of we clothes , everything . we be , you hear about the room , the big large communal shower room where you could either get shower with water or shower with gas , and we be in one of those . and we be shower with water .", "all these place I walk with my finger and remember ... and still I survive with my mother . we have malaria , we suffer terrible from malaria . I remember the first time I see my mother naked in a bath . we be to bath together and my mother be a nice , plump , geshmacke actress , you know ... and I come to the bath with my mother and I see she naked and I start cry , and I run away from the bath , because I could not ... like the same look like you have on the people when you see from the extermination camp . because some people do not think that be in the war in Russia , in a labor camp , or live there be , besides the killing , like it be with this , that it be different for a jew .", "we have malaria , we suffer terrible from malaria . I remember the first time I see my mother naked in a bath . we be to bath together and my mother be a nice , plump , geshmacke actress , you know ... and I come to the bath with my mother and I see she naked and I start cry , and I run away from the bath , because I could not ... like the same look like you have on the people when you see from the extermination camp . because some people do not think that be in the war in Russia , in a labor camp , or live there be , besides the killing , like it be with this , that it be different for a jew . my mother look the same way .", "jf : this be tape five , side one of a interview with Mrs. Eva Bentley on April 2nd , 1985 . you be talk about after the return to you yellow star house , and the Arrow Cross family that have live there have flee , after destroy much of what you have leave , much of you possession . EB : whatever they could not take with they , because they strip the place . whatever we have there they take -- food and clothing and everything whatever they could move in a hurry they take with they . and whatever they could not , they destroy .", "after that , of course , the most important thing , we be shave . shave on the top and shave on the bottom and when they shave you on the bottom they have a lot of time a lot of fun with you , you know . and then we be strip of everything we have on - all we clothing - and we be hand a dress and some shoe . I have a black dress which must have fit a 300 pound woman and it go down to my ankle . nothing underneath .", "they have already hear the tank rumble one or two day before , but this group of spanish inmates\u00f1all of they political prisoners\u00f1were ready to open the gate for we . and they jump down from the structure above the gate and open the gate wide . as we drive into the compound , the first stunning sight that greet we be a pyramid of body , all of they completely naked , most of they obviously starve to death , period . we estimate that this primary pyramid in the courtyard , in the major courtyard , consist of roughly six thousand human . as we travel around the camp , additional smaller pile of body be present .", "it be just like Dante 's Inferno . that it look like . and they be unload the people so they , and they have to undress right there , and they be shoot . so they hide . they be smart two kid .", "you know , so you do not have to worry about it . '' so we go into this barrack . we have to undress , completely naked , and there be barber there . and then it be thousand of people there , light , you know , and table . and the S.S. be there .", "NL : seldom . hf : yeah . most of the time we undress on the outside , go in the shower . even in the middle of winter no matter how cold it be we always undress on the outside , leave we clothes on the outside , go inside , shower , come out again , put on we clothes again . NL : yeah .", "hf : yeah . most of the time we undress on the outside , go in the shower . even in the middle of winter no matter how cold it be we always undress on the outside , leave we clothes on the outside , go inside , shower , come out again , put on we clothes again . NL : yeah . but now at Auschwitz you get it , be it hot water ?", "anything at all ? any remnant of they former life ? kf : no , because they have be strip . when they be put in concentration camp , they be just strip of the gold in they tooth . they be strip of all , any jewelry .", "any remnant of they former life ? kf : no , because they have be strip . when they be put in concentration camp , they be just strip of the gold in they tooth . they be strip of all , any jewelry . they be strip of any clothing they have .", "kf : no , because they have be strip . when they be put in concentration camp , they be just strip of the gold in they tooth . they be strip of all , any jewelry . they be strip of any clothing they have . as you will see in one of these picture ... pile of body of clothing that be just put off for trash .", "when they be put in concentration camp , they be just strip of the gold in they tooth . they be strip of all , any jewelry . they be strip of any clothing they have . as you will see in one of these picture ... pile of body of clothing that be just put off for trash . and they be strip of everything and just give a uniform and that be what they have to wear .", "they be strip of any clothing they have . as you will see in one of these picture ... pile of body of clothing that be just put off for trash . and they be strip of everything and just give a uniform and that be what they have to wear . np : so they be totally in limbo . kf : they have , one of the book that I have read , that give such a good picture of concentration life be Corrie ten Boom 's .", "there be other disease transmit by lice and everything be full of lice . it be so bad in 1941-42 that if you walk in the street , and the street be extremely crowd , if a small wind come you could be sure that the wind bring with it some lice . the place that we live , we have a rule that everybody have to strip completely before we enter the apartment just to shake all the lice out . but in spite of that , in one apartment where we live a woman die of typhus . that be my first close encounter with death in the apartment itself .", "the absence of sanitation . in the beginning we have still be take shower . although that be not all that healthy because we make to walk wet and undress through the cold weather back to the barracks . anyway , we have manage somehow to keep clean in some way . but , partly because , perhaps , also new transport have arrive from the East that be already in bad shape , people begin to come .", "here be the rich Jews . '' and the first week , when they walk in into we town , they come to we apartment . and the first thing they strip , it be , eh , they take we piano , which , this be for I the hardest part to part , because I play piano . and , take we persian carpeting , and crystal chandelier . this be the first week .", "then , when they be do , they take I , they be on top of the mountain over there . they be make fire , and music be play , and you need to go , and dig you own grave . undress yourself . -lsb- pause -rsb- and , dig the grave , and lay down . in meantime , I hear the shooting .", "you hear nothing ... as : yes , there be a lot of rumor that , yes , that people be kill , and I have see killing . then you know , I , the same way that I be order to undress yourself , undress yourself if you do not do it , but I could not believe that they would go and do it , to have gas chamber , and kill you by hundred at the same time . I could not believe it . ms : when you be in the labor camp , and , and then , on you walk to Auschwitz ...", "I be identical in the same program what , as this girl be , except I be younger than she be . O.K. ? then , it be just like , I be in this camp too , which we need to completely be nude , and that be how I be sentence the first time to die , to undress myself , dig my own grave , and then they be shoot . when I see , I have see all those man march in nude , and be sentence , this break I up completely . I could not for two day sleep , because it bring my whole memory back .", "jf : in the ground , inside the camp ? HA : yes , inside the camp . they tell we to undress . I start to undress , I be already in my underwear , and all of a sudden someone come on a horse . he name be Bitner , SS man .", "HA : yes , inside the camp . they tell we to undress . I start to undress , I be already in my underwear , and all of a sudden someone come on a horse . he name be Bitner , SS man . he say , `` halt !", "HA : yes , I have very vivid memory of one particular child . this be in the Lemberg in this camp , there be one child when I come to the camp , he name be Ushi , I only remember Ushi . he be a jewish child , he would not let anybody to undress he . only one woman would undress he . Mrs. Somers , she would undress he , because he be apparently leave by he parent stay in some place in Lemberg .", "this be in the Lemberg in this camp , there be one child when I come to the camp , he name be Ushi , I only remember Ushi . he be a jewish child , he would not let anybody to undress he . only one woman would undress he . Mrs. Somers , she would undress he , because he be apparently leave by he parent stay in some place in Lemberg . he do not look like a jewish kid .", "he be a jewish child , he would not let anybody to undress he . only one woman would undress he . Mrs. Somers , she would undress he , because he be apparently leave by he parent stay in some place in Lemberg . he do not look like a jewish kid . he be blonde , beautiful hair , completely a catholic child , a gentile child .", "this exhaust body be drive 160 mile on foot in winter , with four time food in sixteen day . so I become the same skeleton exactly what the Jews be in Auchwitz , exactly . when I undress myself in a emergency hospital , and they put I in a primitive bathtub , I try to laugh about myself because God give I this misery to endure , and I see myself that my lower arm be thicker because there be two bone , and my upper arm there be only one bone , so it be thinner , and only a little noise of a animal come out from my mouth . I think I be laugh . so I be a totally destroy man from this russian pilgrimage for sixteen day .", "sb : in the camp . bf : and , but this night of Pesach , they let we stand outside the whole night , and there be this , they stand -- we have lice -- we have those lice there this time . and so we have to , we stand the whole night naked outside . and we have to give we clothes , to get out of the barracks , to put we clothes . we stand night outside , and then we have to go to , I do not remember yet now what they do .", "the lining be with sheep skin . bf : you know , there be sheep skin and there be leather . leather strip on it , you know ? -lsb- unclear -rsb- . sb : ah , no , I do not , but ...", "it be very cruel . so we do not know what happen to we , what will happen . then they say we should , should undress . and then we stand naked , you stand naked , we stand naked . I be so happy it be June , it be not so awful .", "so we do not know what happen to we , what will happen . then they say we should , should undress . and then we stand naked , you stand naked , we stand naked . I be so happy it be June , it be not so awful . and then you want to wait , and then to go to stand in a room .", "sb : gently . bf : -lsb- chuckle -rsb- it be awful . and then come in the Germans , between all the naked woman . they come to , to look at you . the german officer come to -lsb- chuckle -rsb- -- this be something , and then you get in another room .", "he , she daughter be a real Philips employee , this aunt . she be already almost 70 year . and I remember when we be naked and she be already in a -- bad -- she come through . sb : ah hah . bf : she be in the bad , she t - , eh , bad , eh , state .", "sb : ah hah . bf : she be in the bad , she t - , eh , bad , eh , state . so we put she on the bench and all that I see she , she only be this old , naked woman on this bench . I see she always how she be there , with she daughter , she be . sb : so , but the child who be with you , be they separate ?", "people really , we speak with people who be there a longer time . and then they bring we again to this sauna place , and you have to sh - ... sb : make you strip again . bf : naked . undress .", "and then they bring we again to this sauna place , and you have to sh - ... sb : make you strip again . bf : naked . undress . and then they start to separate .", "sb : make you strip again . bf : naked . undress . and then they start to separate . and everybody out , `` how old be you ?", "a city block long ! and there be body , 15 to 20 foot high , arm , leg , head , foot stick out . they be all naked , all emaciated , stack like some sort of a inhuman mural . it be just awful . and I really think that the authority want we shock .", "the medic work terribly hard . they delouse people because , of course , typhus be spread by lice . they be puff DDT down people 's clothing , and the people who be in the worst rag that we could get any clothes for , we be force they to strip off and delouse they and take they clothes away . it be just a endless nightmare , and the death rate finally drop , if you can call it drop , to 150 to 200 a day . that last for about three week , and it drop again .", "and we literally go in with the first group . one of the girl do not want to get undressed and she go in in a swimsuit . I go in naked with they . and some of the nurse that come later and some of the Red Cross volunteer do this too . and the word get out that they really be shower .", "we need this , we need that , we need just everything . imagine start life from scratch . you be stand there naked , and you go to think about everything you need . and this be the position that these people be in . I mean this be what we be try to tell , you know , that we need thing .", "they throw they not even to the mother , just to the luggage . we come to Auschwitz , to the bath . they start to tell we we should undress . and we say , I say there to the jewish , there be jewish man work , `` how can we undress ? '' he say , `` look , you be not the first one here .", "we come to Auschwitz , to the bath . they start to tell we we should undress . and we say , I say there to the jewish , there be jewish man work , `` how can we undress ? '' he say , `` look , you be not the first one here . you be not the last one here .", "and the S.S. stay and shoot they down just like -- so we come back to that , to Auschwitz . and finally they take we . now we be sure we be go to the , they tell we to undress , we should . and we be near the bath , so we know if , we think , we be not undress near the bath then they take we to the crematorium . we be sit all night , and , outside , be September .", "and finally they take we . now we be sure we be go to the , they tell we to undress , we should . and we be near the bath , so we know if , we think , we be not undress near the bath then they take we to the crematorium . we be sit all night , and , outside , be September . later , they take we clothes away .", "and between those 400 girl , two manage to come without hand . there be a selection . they select we naked . we be naked . we be , they look eye and hand .", "there be a selection . they select we naked . we be naked . we be , they look eye and hand . how , we never know how they survi - , how they be s - , how they escape , the two .", "I mean , you have all these peasant from the surroundings use to come and buy . so you take off a shirt and you sell it to buy food . and in all other thing , you start slowly , slowly , until you be almost naked . but my mother have , in this jar of marmalade , she have a big gold watch with a chain hide . she really take she -- she have really courage .", "whether that be by law that they could not become german citizen , or whether that be because of they own desire not to , I do not know that . at any rate , these people be all expel from Germany at that time and they be send to a no-man 's land , which be a certain area of land between the border of Poland and Germany where german people live and also where some polish people live . and one be not quite certain just exactly to whom that strip of land belong . it be a kind of no-man 's land , as I say . and there they live off the generosity of farmer , perhaps , and perhaps not .", "besides that -- the -- we have find out from the Holocaust Museum in Washington that there be evidence that the consul in the various european city and country be tell not to make immigration so easy ; to make thing as difficult as possible , because America be not too anxious to receive people without means . by the time , in 1939 , that immigrant leave Germany , they could not take any kind of finances out of Germany any more . as a matter of fact , they be strip of all they asset . everything be confiscate . Bank account be confiscate .", "you jewelry have to be turn in , with the exception of a wedding ring , a wedding band . all silverware have to be , all valuable , all precious metal and jewel have to be turn in , coin , except for one set of silverware per person to eat with . the jewish people be be strip of they belongings by a government that sanction this highway robbery . can you understand that ? I can not understand it , and I never will .", "the Lithuanians drive the truck , and the ss be there and they take they from we town . six kilometer out in the wood , there be already the ditch dig , and the ss trooper , and the Germans and the Lithuanians , they be drunk , be already drunk , they have machine gun ready . they tell they to undress in front of the grave , to get all of the possession , take everything away , and they machine gun everyone of they to death . some of they be even alive and they bury they alive . the blood come through the ground the next , the next morning .", "the whole thing be , they later , they call it the carpet , you know ? in the language , the military language . they rush over a special strip , and one after another , and let the bomb fall . they call it `` they lay a carpet . '' and you could see it later .", "ns : good Friday be a very , very solemn day for they , and a very frightful day for we , because at that time the hate be more outspoken . Jesus be crucify , and so , I remember , that even in school they use to teach in front of we , and we be also punish in school many time , stand I remember for nothing . like we use to be punish , the punishment be to stand in a corner , and hot , dry corn , be throw on the floor , and we have to stay on we naked knee on the corn with we hand up . and now you know what be happen . it be not a lot of corn , it be like ten different piece .", "by the way , the priest be the biggest organizer . what they do with they be , they be take individually to about a half a mile away to a big , big barn . there they be strip completely of everything , they jewelry , whatever they have , they clothing , completely naked , and then individually they be escort by two Ukrainians , this be what be tell later , two maybe one , or three Ukrainians , it depend , to the place of the massacre , and imagine they already know when they be strip naked , where they be go , and that place be , there be already a ditch that be prepare , in those day they prepare a ditch in the bottom of a mountain , which I know exactly where the location be . it be call , a kever -lsb- grave -rsb- and there they say to those henchman , `` here be yours . do whatever you want to do . ''", "NL : by a ukrainian ? ns : yes . he hit he and he say , `` make believe you be dead , '' and he fall down in the ditch , with dead body on top of he , with blood run all over the place , and when everything quiet down , he run away naked . he be wound , with blood . he run away in a cornfield to another town and another town , they catch he over there , and they beat he up , and they give he to the main authority , and he wind up be in a concentration camp and survive , and he tell the whole story .", "finally he take this girl , which I know the girl very well . she live next door to we , a young girl . he make she undress , and he -- really molest she and shoot she , finally , right in the front of . I see this . that be the end for I .", "anyway , they take they . it be all in summertime and they king -- they have a king that look like a Buddha , a very fat man , have always something wrap around he waist . he be all naked , very fat and he have , like , four woman around he , fan he , I guess . they be he harem or something , and they take whole bunch of they , maybe around a hundred gypsy , maybe less - but they didn\u00edt have much , they just have some horse and whatever . they take they on wagon , horse-buggy thing .", "they be very happy . they be cheerful at night , they be singing in they quarter . they have a beautiful sculpture , a still remember a beautiful sculpture of a naked woman in front of they quarter . one of they must have be a artist . make from snow .", "jf : what happen to you ? MT : they would not do anything to I , so I guess they do not have gay individual there or something , and I be not interesting enough for older woman , for mature woman . I be never molest or make a fool of that way , but I have to undress and run around naked . I would hide around my mother . then would come the time that they turn the water on .", "\\ par -rcb- \\ pard \\ fi720 \\ sl393 \\ tx0 \\ tx0 \\ tx720 \\ tx1440 \\ tx2160 \\ tx2880 \\ tx3600 \\ tx4320 \\ tx5040 \\ tx5760 \\ tx6480 \\ tx7200 \\ tx7920 \\ tx8640 \\ tx9360 -lcb- \\ plain MT : \\ tab they would not do anything to I , so I guess they do not have gay individual there or something , and I be not interesting enough for older woman , for mature woman . I be never molest or make a fool of that way , but I have to undress and run around naked . I would hide around my mother . then would come the time that they turn the water on .", "anyway , they take they . it be all in summertime and they king -- they have a king that look like a Buddha , a very fat man , have always something wrap around he waist . he be all naked , very fat and he have , like , four woman around he , fan he , I guess . they be he harem or something , and they take whole bunch of they , maybe around a hundred gypsy , maybe less - but they didn \\ ' 92t have much , they just have some horse and whatever . they take they on wagon , horse-buggy thing .", "they be very happy . they be cheerful at night , they be singing in they quarter . they have a beautiful sculpture , a still remember a beautiful sculpture of a naked woman in front of they quarter . one of they must have be a artist . make from snow .", "they also have gas chamber in ravensbr\u00fcck and they send we to take shower quite often and we be always worry that the shower would wind up be gas . EM : do you know about the shower be gas ? LW : I know about it in Auschwitz once I get there because they make we take shower every few day , get undressed and give they we uniform that we wear ; we wear strip uniform . I do not know if they give we back the same one or new one , they all look dirty , they all look the same but they use to make we get undressed and we never know if we get into the shower if it would be water or if it would be gas . so we know about the gas .", "je : yes . we have a twelve unit dispensary assign to special troops of the 79th Infantry Division and all twelve of we , the twelve man , major g\u00f6rki -lsb- phonetic -rsb- who command it , and myself , Captain Eingorn , and we go together . and we see just pile of body , nothing , most of they naked , and practically skeleton . very , very undernourished . and then we see the railroad tie where they have just pile up the body , with beechwood , and then coat they with beechwood creosote and would be burn they .", "as we be stay in the wood , we could not see the people , but we hear scream and cry . they bring the father and mother and that daughter . they get undressed in front of the grave , and they kill they naked at the ... bs : right there . nf : jump down .", "I jump down after he . as I be young and strong , I be able to push my boyfriend out . we have to get undressed , only the top , take off we shirt on the top , that we be naked on top as we be work there . I jump down after , I push he out . I turn over the body .", "I lose approximately 37 member of my family . ss : in Auschwitz , what be you daily routine ? jf : before we be take to the barrack , or the building , where , that be go to be my home for the next seven month , we be march to a ar -- to another section where we be tell to undress , and stark naked , file by a table where woman in a white uniform be hold clipper . they shave we hair , and all we bodily , we head , and all we bodily hair . and while all this procedure be go on , german soldier and man in striped uniform be mill about .", "jf : they be jewish or political prisoner who work there . ss : yeah . jf : imagine the feeling of a 15-year-old girl , or plus all the other woman who be with I , stark naked , have to walk around and to walk by these soldier and these man . that be we first experience with that . and there be many more later on .", "and at that time , we be march out of the immediate compound to a area where I could smell the odor of burn flesh much more pronounced than it be in lager c . we be take to the gas chamber , I , with a group of other people . put through the entry room , we be tell to undress . they usher we into a room with brick , bleacher , and bench . we be sit there , many , many of we , two thousand at a time .", "I be put into cattle car again , and take to my last destination of the camp , which be the second most horrendous , horrible camp in the entire system , call Bergen-Belsen . upon arrival to Bergen-Belsen , my two friend -- who be always next to I , and who drag I during the death march at one point when I could not walk anymore and I beg they to leave I behind but they would not so I just , they just drag I till I could take step on my own -- my two friend inform I that they have a little hoard of jewelry , that my friend have take out of clothing that she sort . and we have to think quickly how to save it , because we be , we have to strip and they take away my treasured coat . that be the end of that . and we know that in the other end we will just get a garment , with no pocket , no way to put anything away .", "we be simply swim in it . and , then at one stage , they , one of the young girl apparently go crazy . she start to scream and , she be the daughter of -- she name be Malach -- and she be the daughter of a man who have a strip iron business in we city . and , they shoot she through the head , and they ask for two people to take she body out . I have be try to escape whenever I , and so I do , I volunteer to take the body out .", "I sit on top of bundle near the window . there be a teeny window with a bar , and I could see what happen . I know at one point that some people I know , older man , who be part of the train which I have see in Auschwitz , I mean in Drancy , try to escape , and I see a whole bunch of man walk on the ground naked , be take to the first car , because they have try to escape . so we know thing be really desperate . and then I have to take care of that little boy .", "it look big but I , of course after have be in a , confine in a cattle car for three , four day , I mean anything would look bigger . I have never be back there to really realize how big this place be . but we be tell to undress , to leave everything we have . and then they shave we , take all we hair off , send we to the next room where we have a shower , cold shower , no soap , no towel . of course we now know that it be either a shower or the gas .", "`` but they will have a different style ! '' I say , `` when you have a hole you put a patch . but you will not be naked . '' lf : you can talk from experience and from what happen to you . lk : I say , `` you do not have to live year from year with wet foot what never dry out in wintertime , no place to dry out . ''", "fk : I do not think it hap -- you know the Roer River be on the , Roer River be on the french side of the Rhine . PS : yeah . fk : it be a small , narrow strip of land as you be look at a map . it could have be in there , but it could have be after the Rhine too . I know we have break out and be go hell for -lsb- unclear -rsb- to get further up toward Berlin .", "you get in you truck and go . '' -lsb- chuckle -rsb- we be not unhappy about that . so we then go down to Trier , in the german palatinate I think you call it , and there we be put to work strip transformer and power wiring and every thing else off the german countryside and hand it over to the french so they could be place war damage in France . and in this period I take a little leave and go to Munich . and I go to Dachau and I see that .", "fk : I think so . PS : how long do you remain in Europe after the german surrender ? fk : well , after surrender , as I say we would be send over back toward France to Trier to do the strip of power , electrical thing for the French . then we be send down to Regensburg , which be over very next to Czechoslovakia . and there we be tell to sit down and keep ourselves out of trouble until they find boat space for we to go down through the Suez .", "they do not know that there be jewish people live there . so my relative tell I that they want I to go and check some relative that be live in town and see if they be alive . I take my band , my Red Cross -- because I work in the hospital you get a strip -- and I walk out from the house to visit the relative . and walk the street , I see people lie dead in the street and I meet some german . they do not recognize that I be jewish , that I be a jew , and they ask I in German where be jewish living so I decide to keep quiet and tell they that I do not understand german , because when I will speak German they will recognize that I be a jew .", "so when we pass , when we come there , '' he say , `` lay down low . '' but , my curiosity make I not lay down low ; I have to look . there be ss man run around naked in a stream of water in the ideal bathing , beautiful body . all naked . a huge amount of they , I do not know .", "but , my curiosity make I not lay down low ; I have to look . there be ss man run around naked in a stream of water in the ideal bathing , beautiful body . all naked . a huge amount of they , I do not know . then I lay down and I figure , my God , look where I be go , in Marie Boussais , think I be run away from they .", "we be allow three hour of electricity a day . now the cable with the electricity run in front of the dirt floor room . there be naked cable . so the fellow have make for I a jimjig , like two hook on a stick , and the electric cable connect to a little radiator they have put up for I , so that I could warm the room for Armand . it be bitter cold , the winter be horrible .", "I have nothing to steal , because I , thank God , I have nothing to load myself , and I go to my third floor room where all the guy be . they want that rum , that barrel of rum be almost empty , empty . and they go around naked measure the size of they penis , drunk . every obscene scene , because they have not see woman for a long time . so the alcohol whip they up to obscenity .", "so the alcohol whip they up to obscenity . nothing to the extent of sexual contact or whatever it be . I come in and it be like a dantesque picture to I , to see all those drunken frenchmen run around naked . all right , I be not a saint , however , I would still a symptom of civilization in I . but you have to dance how the music play .", "they take we out to make trench , and one of the german Nazis be unhappy for apparent reason . and he come , and one girl , beautiful girl , try to run away , and they catch she buy a toothbrush in a supermarket . and they bring she to the outskirts where we be make trench , and they strip she naked , and shoot she in front of all of we . -lsb- weep -rsb- tape one , side two : ss : ... all the tsuris -lsb- trouble -rsb- that we have to go through later on .", "MR. LIEBSTER : A big hall like douche -- to take a douche of water , a water shower . in place of the water come -- gas come out . and they be all naked . and only the number , they could identify . but they have no clothes , no papers , nothing .", "so we go away through Switzerland . and I have to say , it be wonderful how the swiss act , help we , with food and clothing and everything . but something I can not forget be that first day when we arrive , they have we undress completely because they be afraid we would bring sickness into Switzerland . I be 15 year old . I be there .", "I be 15 year old . I be there . my mother be naked . I be naked . and I see she misery .", "I be there . my mother be naked . I be naked . and I see she misery . that body .", "so they take I right away to the prison and then they take I to the Gestapo . and the whole day they interrogate I . they have I strip in the nude . they would not even let I go to the toilet . they follow I .", "but I will tell you , it -- it -- good thing come of it , because when they start -- when they start transport Jews to the death camp of Lvov , and you know , and -- and -- of Beljets , and -- and -- and other camp , some people break the little window in the boxcar open , and throw child out , or youngster get out . so quite often , people knock on the door , and specifically I remember th -- a fellow that later become one of the best partisan , one of the best sharpshooter that we have , Moishe lot , he die three year ago . he come , knock to the door , he be stark naked , stark naked . he say , `` let I in , I be very cold , and I want to go in with you tomorrow to work . '' so I take he in , I give he something to eat , he warm up , and I give he some clothing , and in the morning he blended in with the group , and go to camp .", "let I lighten it for you , and tell you again a story that you will get a chuckle of . we , as I tell you before , be stay in the forest in dig -- in dug-out , in -- in deep basement , you know , with a stove inside , it be warm . you know , you could undress and sleep comfortably . but as far as physical need , to go to the toilet and what have you , you have to go outside . so what we do be we take a plank of wood , and we tie it , or nail it , you know , if we have nail , most case we tie it between two tree , so a person can sit down , and , you know , do whatever he need to , and come back .", "she see the passport . they examine I . I have to undress . it be a woman . and I have -- I still have it , I have to show you .", "I be sure a lot of woman ... I do not want to explain how the other woman be look when I see they . Q : explain it . a : somebody be naked , and some of they be mentally . absolutely mentally . a : mentally ill ?", "Q : how be the inmate dress ? a : very , very poorly . many of they naked . Q : any type of uniform ? a : no .", "a : be take over . Bousch be in command , and he instruction be no food , no nothing until the medic get there . they have gather in the town of Linz quite a lot of garment for both male and female and have pass those out so that these people that be naked have something to put on . Q : and they be strong enough to dress themselves ? a : not all of they , no .", "but I carry that in my pocket wherever I go . even to Paris when the war be over . I would feel naked without it . Q : how do you feel when you return to the States ? a : a good example of that be that a friend of mine up in Ohio and I go to see the Cleveland Indians play a baseball game .", "rotting meat . you could see they be people . many of they be naked , and none of they have shoe . and then we walk inside and see these skinny people who be still live . we realize they be starve and we have nothing but some candy bar which we get in a ration , so one of my enlist man who walk in with I give a candy bar to one of these people .", "it be like a giant cesspool . the sturdiest structure in the camp be the weirdly efficient crematorium . outside of the crematorium , I see a long flatbed trailer load with four layer of naked , starve body . at least 200 tiny adult corpse , weigh 40 to 60 pound each , I guess , be stack and tie like cord wood await the oven . this gruesome shipment have be transport along the german highway almost cover with canvas , but open enough to see under .", "live prisoner be haul into the camp by rail and by truck . some be select for work in the factory while they life last ; the other be mark for final disposal take into a room with simulated shower head . they strip for the shower and be bolt into the room . the victim realize too late that gas , not water , come out of the nozzle . all the body be completely strip of jewelry , gold tooth , and any other item of value before be throw down a chute into the oven room .", "they strip for the shower and be bolt into the room . the victim realize too late that gas , not water , come out of the nozzle . all the body be completely strip of jewelry , gold tooth , and any other item of value before be throw down a chute into the oven room . there be a administration building in front of the entrance gate with lab for medical experimentation on human . many lamp of tattooed skin be show to I by the inmate in grisly display .", "2ibid . clothing burn off . they be naked . Q : do you see if they be man and woman , old , young ? a : as I recall it , they be man .", "just load with human body . most of they Jews , at this particular point in time . and all naked . they apparently have be cart from Warsaw or someplace in these boxcar , and the flatcar , of course , be stack with human body . the boxcar be open and when the door open , the one that be dead next to the door fall out on the ground .", "they apparently have be cart from Warsaw or someplace in these boxcar , and the flatcar , of course , be stack with human body . the boxcar be open and when the door open , the one that be dead next to the door fall out on the ground . as I walk past , and I could see inside the boxcar , just nothing but naked human body . as to the gas chamber , this be a very , very , clever system they have in which they would herd the one that be alive and this be they basic system of extermination . they would bring they into this place and there be the crematorium -- and I think it be even next door or adjoining -- and hand these prisoner a towel and a bar of soap and tell they to walk in that room which the sign say `` Showers '' .", "Q : this be the second picture which we will m ark `` B. '' tell we about it . a : in the block where the prisoner sleep on board ... the only thing I can liken it to be a broiler house like you might find here in Georgia , and there be either two or three tier of these shelve arrangement , just board lay down , and the prisoner sleep on those . each night as they die in they sleep or whenever they die in these block , there be detail that each morning take the dead to the end of the block and strip the clothes off of they and then they be move out into this storage area here . at least , this be where we find this pile of body . later , they be burn in the crematorium .", "and what be explain to I be that they bring russian prisoner in from the front in closed truck ; they have some sort of a way that they force they in there , in cordwood fashion , and they draw this top over they and that many of they by the time they get to Buchenwald be dead . they back the truck up to the crematorium where this chute that come down into the basement be , and as the body be push down the chute , any that be still move , they skull be crack with this club , and then they be hang at the base of the skull on these meat hook . they be strip of they clothes , they tooth be knock out and all the gold be render from they tooth , and then there be a cart on track that they load these body on . and a elevator arrangement , the detail of which be too vague to I now ... but this cart go up and these track down the center of this somehow ... Q : yes .", "of course , you know that when they describe torture and thing like this , you -- but -- but the -- the killing be not on the mass level that the thing that we encounter in -- in El Salvador . the -- the thing that -- that stru -- have strike I always in my work in human rights be the different -- that some of the people who commit these act have no -- no s-s -- I do not know , i-it 's not question of conscience , but if we -- j-just to give you a example , we -- we have one man who testify as a witness , have be involve in this , and we ask , be they tortured ? and he say , `` no , they be not tortured , '' but -- and we say , `` well you have this woman standing there for 24 hour naked in this cellar , try to get a confession in front of man . '' `` well , that be not torture . '' y-you know , the different notion of what be torture , if y -- if you do not hit somebody over the head , then it be okay .", "now this be a very , very rewarding thing for I . because if I start a thing , we be kill , and nobody do anything . and this time we be undress -- I be not talk I personally , but the Jews , and we be undr -- dress over a -- a -- a ditch , and we be kill . now if e-each one of they would think , if I would live and if I could pay they back , everybody will do it . now , after the war , people do not do it .", "take away my clothes . take away the clothing , take away I have picture from home , everything give away . go into shower one side , come out other side naked , give I other clothes and a different man , a different person . do they give you a striped uniform too or just ___ ? yeah , sure .", "take away my clothes . take away the clothing , take away I have picture from home , everything give away . go into shower one side , come out other side naked , give I other clothes and a different man , a different person . do they give you a striped uniform too or just ___ ? yeah , sure .", "they do not have too much to eat so they , from the guard , they come in , not all of they , whoever be duty-free and they be look by we . or sometimes , when we come in by the gate , count so they can pull you out . in the boot , this they be allow and to strip you and to look . sometimes you find money also . anything you be not allow you could find , otherwise , we be not able to survive and so on and so on .", "eight hundred people , well-dressed , _______ they bring they to we , 800 . when they bring they to we , so the ukrainian ______ I be a old calhoon but those arte the new one and they know , the Germans do not know so much as the Ukrainians , they know that they have money and so on and so on . go in from work , _____ , that be a new one , a ukrainian pull he out , strip he -- they strip once my uncle also . they come in , in the barracks . once , if the lagerfuhrer , that Fiess or he helper , adjutant , come in and see in the guard .", "as a matter of fact , just a week ago or two week ago . he work for the ss , he be very handy . he be give material to do for the -- either the wife of the ss or the german soldier I do not know -- like pin or book marker or little thing like that out of metal and leather strip . he make some for I and I save they . I have those various thing .", "Q : oh there be ? a : right , a football game be stage in one of the barracks . for that event , a trophy , be a leather strip and I see the picture in this book which be identical to what he make . it be find after liberation in camp , this item . I would say 99 % sure that he must have make that .", "the gate say like all camp , Arbeit Macht Frei which mean work make free . in the camp , I keep ask as we walk through the slau ______ -- . you be take to a place where you be search and strip which be call slau _______ , mean like a sluice . there be people work who be already in Terezin and I keep ask they if they know my brother . he be still there and then maybe a day or two later , I really do not remember , it take a day or two to locate he and see he .", "be these people derange ? what do you father see when he get out of that car ? a : he see the sign that `` Work make you free '' and he see there be a building that you go into to strip and get rid of all the clothing . they give you the prison clothing . Q : he do not see any dead people ?", "? a : until much later when they get a feel for the rhythm of the camp . Q : okay so together they get strip ? a : they get strip , they get shower . believe it or not they get shower , they get they haircut and they have to give up they shoe and they get they uniform .", "a : until much later when they get a feel for the rhythm of the camp . Q : okay so together they get strip ? a : they get strip , they get shower . believe it or not they get shower , they get they haircut and they have to give up they shoe and they get they uniform . they be tattoo I think .", "Lisa , you can come in , say whatever -- . -lcb- we also have to -- in all town . it be __________ , to put strip on the glass -rcb- oh , yeah strip on the glass . -lcb- on the glass from shatter , you know . in case it shatter in the bombing -rcb- .", "we come into Flossenburg iu July -- it be real hot , I think the middle of July . they take off all the clothes . we have to throw away the clothes , naked , you know , like you be bear . you be still in you regular civilian clothes , right ? no , no , no .", "she tell we what be go on over there in the cemetery when they bring the people . they have to dig they grave , a trench . they undress they and they shoot they with a machine gun . they fall down and the Poles be stay over there and take off the rest what be over there -- for sample , the stocking or the underwear . they rob they .", "they do not belong to you . they belong to David Bass what you kill he . I strip he naked and I tell he go home . everybody be clap . I know , you know , a shame .", "the way up to the camp 's entrance lead through a very steep road which to we , at that time be like scale Mt. Everest . we arrival at the shower coincide with a blackout due to a air raid alarm which last for most of the night . I remember a wave of naked body push towards the door and attendant , use high pressure hose with cold water , force we back to the wall , while those at the wall push we back again , and throughout all this there be dead body on the floor and they number increase . it be a night never to be forget . when release in the morning and assign to the quarantine barrack , it take almost another day before we receive the first morsel of food .", "Snow , it be the winter , it be no heat at all over there . I go over there one day , I want to see how this go on . like in the army , they undress and they go like a commission , from one doctor to another . you name this and that where you work . and I tell to he , listen , you can go free .", "do not worry about anything . everything be shrivel . he stay for half a hour over there , naked to wait for the doctor . do not think they will recognize who you be . this be what it be .", "they build , they put down bush in both end . in the center , it be like a cross-up , like a bridge . they bring the people over there naked . they let they out from the truck and they close the thing . the machine gun shoot they down .", "I do not know what the English be go to do with they , but help the english people fight Germany . and we want to sign up . when they take I for a medical examination , which they undress we completely . at that particular point in Cuzar I be reject because they find out that I be circumcise and I be jewish , not polish even though I speak polish and my uncle speak polish and we be bear in Poland , but because we be jewish they do not accept we . and they give I a document , in polish it be write _________ .", "I : well , we do have some stuff but ... I ... this be ... I ... the only thing I recall be that I have a locket . I have a locket that I ... a heart , and I remember have that for a long time even when I arrive in Auschwitz and I be very brazen . we would stand on line for the shower and we would have to strip naked and I have enough presence of mind to know that I have to take this thing off and I would hold on to it . I do not know how I do it , but I do it . I lose the locket however , somewhere .", "I do not have my twin -- because he be ... we be not of the same sex so it be a little harder . but throughout all the time in the hospital and through experiment and through horrible time , I always feel that Rene be alive and I say that I have to stay alive to take care of he . this be like my mission in life and I very clearly remember umm ... stand on line -- it be always cold , of course -- and we be go into the shower , stand naked and again . I bring up the locket -- for a long time , I be miraculously able to hang on , hide the fact that I have this locket , and always put it back on after I come out of the shower . I also remember that somehow I know already that not everybody come out of the shower , so every time we be line up like this , I remember that fear , like oh my God , be this the last time ?", "I be not there when the shower be build , but I understand that the day they put in the shower they evacuate . so I do not know about it . but it be build outside the camp so you would have to run out naked to take the shower and come back . Ok ? but I be not even there then .", "the death rate be very high . it be a awful camp . we work there on build a landing strip for german plane . I believe that be what it be . but in the meantime I learn one way to supplement the food and not to die of hunger .", ". we live in abandon farmhouse I remember . we also -- I be also put on -- they call Commando -- to a place call Rzekne and while I be there , I be ... I come in contact with Boleslav Michovsky who have become fairly well know in this country because he be the carpenter in Minneola that be accuse of the war crime -- as a war criminal and then I guess he lose -- be strip of he citizenship and be suppose to be deport and he be now on trial in Germany for he crime . probably now he be in he eighty so he will probably never ... never make it but in any event , that . .", "I do not speak Latvian -- I only speak german . I mean there be just no way . also we hair be crop close and through the middle we have a shaven strip that be re-shaven probably every two or three week so ... and the woman be completely shave . they head be completely shave so you would stand out from the population . I do not know how people ... I guess some people do get away -- you know , not many but I guess some people do .", "the Germans be try to carry back everything that they could carry back . I remember , we be dismantle even the tin roof -- put the sheet of tin in wooden enclosure and they be be ship back to Germany . they be just strip the place and we be there for ... that must have be late ' 44 , that must have be , I would say , early fall to late fall ' 44 , and we be there for several month do that particular thing . one of the unfortunate thing that happen there be that one of the russian bomb hit the building that we be in and probably fifteen or so of we be kill . uh .", "a : when I go to the right , they take I into the uh ... uh . . the camp , they take we to a barrack , to undress , leave everything , completly naked . then they take we to another place , where it be a cabin , a. . .", "Q : so this be in April 1944 ? a : 1944 . and , the ... when we go through that , we have to go outside completely naked in April , completely naked . we be stand there for a while , then all of a sudden , after we , woman - they get into the water and they come out naked - completly naked . and when i. .", "a : 1944 . and , the ... when we go through that , we have to go outside completely naked in April , completely naked . we be stand there for a while , then all of a sudden , after we , woman - they get into the water and they come out naked - completly naked . and when i. . .", "everything be recycle . Anthony : you never see any of these can with the original label on they ? they have already be strip of they label ? Hanna : whatever it be , it be strip . but they be around and they do help and when anything be available , they be use .", "Anthony : you never see any of these can with the original label on they ? they have already be strip of they label ? Hanna : whatever it be , it be strip . but they be around and they do help and when anything be available , they be use . Anthony : real kitchen be not available ?", "you have little bit , they would not take you . big guy , I be big but not big like they be . of course , I be skinny but -- we stay there naked and near the clothes , we still have private clothes . only mark it down with red , red mark , political prisoner , understand ? we put the suit on the side and we stay naked .", "of course , I be skinny but -- we stay there naked and near the clothes , we still have private clothes . only mark it down with red , red mark , political prisoner , understand ? we put the suit on the side and we stay naked . so they select somebody likes . so I see from 50 or 60 , they pull out one and go one side .", "I have a belt , a wide leather belt which my mother sew in money and a switch knife . if ever anybody try to attack I , I should use it . whoever hear that ; you will be in rag , hairless , nameless , sometimes walk naked because there be no clothes for I . we be take into a big barrack . you do not know who be there and there be about 1,000 people in one barrack .", "Anthony : just a prisoner in a uniform ? Lily : no , no . the first thing that they strip the professional , jewish people from they profession . they be just treat like dirt , like laborer , like slave . they be strip away from they human dignity .", "the first thing that they strip the professional , jewish people from they profession . they be just treat like dirt , like laborer , like slave . they be strip away from they human dignity . this be the first thing , be to break they spirit . Anthony : so after he leave the ghetto , he be no longer a pharmacist ?", "a : much later , much later . shortly before they take we away to the work camp . so anyway , the kapo say they be go to come and select we , they need 250 girl for the work camp and they take you to a different area , different camp , a different area and again they shower we , oh God , again , naked and disinfect you . a man have to disinfect you , prisoner , and we be shy , so shy and so ashamed for the man to disinfect you , with the hose , you know . Q : do you remember when this be ?", "so I do not know if they say the truth or not . and another thing I have to say -- when we go to the work camp , I have this very good friend of mine from my home town -- Rochela . and they choose we naked to go to the work camp . so she be very skinny and she be right behind I and I go forward -- they let -- they point I to go forward , I go forward and I be there and I be look for my friend Rochela and she be not there . I give a look to the other side and she be over there -- purple and blue and that be the last that I see of she .", "you could not have a pimple on you body and here they give you for six month not to get you period and we break out in all kind of boil and as a matter of fact , , I do have a boil on my belly but the ss man do not see I , he must have be distract so he do not see the boil , he just point I to go ahead . but we all have something from that -- it be not normal and that be the last I see Rochela . so they choose you naked -- you could not be too skinny , you could not be too fat . you could not have a boil , you could not ... ... can you imagine ? Q : you could not be sick ?", "it be a horrible stench . Q : when you go to the camp , you be separate and where do you go ? a : the first time , the first thing I notice we be strip of all clothing , all belongings . next thing I get a number tattoo . Q : that be do right away ?", "for example , there be one -- well I will tell you about that one because it almost cause we death . also the reason she call my mother into another room be because this lady also make doll which be fully clothe adult doll but they be apparently anatomically correct . so she show this lovely doll but then invite my mother into this next room so that she could undress this male doll and show my mother that it have all its anatomical part . well , while my mother and this lady be out of the room I turn and look at the wall behind I on which hang a picture that this woman have also make . the picture be of a sort of cottage and a yard fill with chicken and there be flower against the cottage and there be little window with shutter and a door and so forth .", "the people who arrive in the transport , they see these big move van with the chimney . and the ss do not threaten they , they be very nice , they say you know we bring you to we farm , because they have be tell that if you be nice to people they will listen to you . and they be there to undress and they say we be go out to a thing and by the time they get there they be already dead . September 1 , 1943 , the ghetto , we german ghetto be completely surround by ss during the night . Q : so we be talk , be there still a division between russian and german jew at this point ?", "everybody go as a gardener . the gardener we never see again . but we be push on the side and we go to a barrack and we have to undress . we have still not prison uniform but we have old clothes mark with ___ . so we have to undress .", "but we be push on the side and we go to a barrack and we have to undress . we have still not prison uniform but we have old clothes mark with ___ . so we have to undress . the little thing we have , here , here , here . nothing .", "the german kapo hate we . the polish kapo , you know . and we be put , just to give you a example , where to undress , this be high in the mountain , we have to undress , we have to run into a shower and this be originally the gas chamber , and the kapo say that be it . and we do not know what would happen . Q : the kapo say you would die ?", "Q : he family ? a : yeah . so before they go into the train , they undress the people . because they know that everybody have hide something in the clothing , which be true . the same thing with I .", "Q : you explain you boy 's collar . a : I sew it in . so everybody who go into the train , woman , man , child , undress . naked to the train . the train , they be roll to Treblinka .", "a : I sew it in . so everybody who go into the train , woman , man , child , undress . naked to the train . the train , they be roll to Treblinka . you know when you come to Treblinka , that be it .", "it be not the shop anymore . Q : you first rude shock ? a : yeah , when we be count and everything , we go into a room to undress and to shave . barber that shave the head and they start give we the striped suit . Q : the striped suit .", "we go to Germany and they stop in a place , and they unlouse we , you know . be cold already . everybody have to undress and be a few barrel with soap . Q : chemical ? a : with a brush .", "Q : chemical ? a : with a brush . you naked . you go to this veld . the guy with the brush clean you up .", "then they catch the three , the two brother and the sister , ____ and _____ . then the two brother , they go first . everybody get 25 or 35 on the naked ___ . Q : in the buttock ? a : and the ss be strongest ss .", "then the german people be there ; they realize that there be a girl with a orthopedic shoe . so one leg be shorter than the other . they take and they realize when she be naked . they take the naked girl out and take she away , naked as she be , because of the foot . now , I know , later I know that she be take to the other room to be kill .", "so one leg be shorter than the other . they take and they realize when she be naked . they take the naked girl out and take she away , naked as she be , because of the foot . now , I know , later I know that she be take to the other room to be kill . because they realize that only when she be naked .", "they take the naked girl out and take she away , naked as she be , because of the foot . now , I know , later I know that she be take to the other room to be kill . because they realize that only when she be naked . Q : do you know this girl ? a : no , no .", "at that time , I do not understand , of course , what be happen . but I have the whole picture in my eye . she be take naked and kill . Q : she be , how old ? a : eighteen .", "then we know already what be happen . the big head of the ______ , when the selection be , the big truck come to the lager and people be just , be black . for instance , after a selection for which they make , nude , _______ the naked people be just throw on the platform of this van and take away . these child be just throw on this platform and take away . they collect the child , put in this and that be my twentieth birthday .", "there be french car , cattle car and they be make out of heavy tin . the heat without water ; sometimes they open the door , half of they be dead . they have to wait sometimes two , three day till there be place to process they in , to take they down to undress and to gas they and then later to cremate they . well , actually in the beginning , they be not cremate . there be ditch which they fill the ditch , this be near the russian border , so there be ditch make , anti-tank ditch .", "there be no bloodshed or anything . they just come in . in the very begin , I do not know if it be the same day they march in or the next day , all the Jews , right away they zero in on the Jews , we have to meet at the marketplace and right away they start with they decree to strip we of all material possession slowly but very systematically . the first request be for the Jews to give all the gold , maybe all the silver , all the radio , everything that have any material value , carpet , Persian carpet , you would not imagine , fur , fur coat , all sort of thing we have to bring to the marketplace , or whatever , I think it be the marketplace , the Germans take that . and that go on for about a week .", "rabbis to donate to commandateur , the commanding officer of the garrison of Minsk Mazowiecki about one kilogram of gold every two month or every three month I can not tell . but we know that they be force because jewish friend tell we that they have to donate all gold . once they strip they with entire possession , then they kill they . Q : do you see this massacre ? a : I see only after massacre when they be use remain jewish people to load the body on the track and take they away to some massive grave .", "when we arrive there nothing happen . we be in such a disarray and tired . the very next morning they tell we to undress . Q : where do they hold you overnight ? a : in one of the barracks -- get undressed , wash , and before we get cup of tea you might call .", "`` he do not know too much but what he do not know , he make up with he mouth . the first job be a elevator shaft that have to be repair . one of the gear be strip and we either have to buy another gear , which be not available because they quit make those . all of the factory be gear for production for the war . so , we have to improvise and put in two gear , tooth we call it .", "all of the factory be gear for production for the war . so , we have to improvise and put in two gear , tooth we call it . we have to take out those two that be strip and file they down and put in two in they place . since we do not have anything to weld it , we have to drill a hole into that gear and then set it up with some screw so it will work for the time be . then that other Karp come over and say , `` boy-oh-boy .", "do anything in particular come to mind when you think of these year ? a : yes , every day there be beat and kill and smash the prisoner , execution almost every day , every day a pill , yeah and they call the number go to work so what happen they take they outside the camp and execution , shoot they . and I think I remember by the end I be there they bring twelve thousand russian war prisoner to Auschwitz and as war prisoner , it be winter time , December , they be twenty four hour naked and a very cold night and snow even . then they put they into barracks and give they some kind of clothing but the food be very , very little so through the winter they almost all die out . there be only a few hundred left of those war prisoner .", "my father would point out to I and say these be refugee from Germany . also we see photograph in the newspaper , picture in the newspaper of the rioting . the story that be behind they ; where they be strip of german citizenship and the polish government declare quickly that they strip they also of the polish citizenship . so they be people without citizenship ; it be very sad ; it be a foretaste of thing to come to a unimaginable proportion and degree . Q : earlier we be talk about patriotism , the polish patriotism of you father .", "then on the platform , which on the right and a platform on the left which separate we from the other section of the train , there be big floodlight and there be guard that be stand on both side . be just maybe two or three guard . all of a sudden you hear the sound of a rolling door open and a man , strip down to he trunk , run out of this heat . he just run and the Germans , the german guard , they begin to hunt he like a rabbit . he say , Ich _______ , I have he !", "open-air latrine . we stand there for what seem a very long time . I believe we be eventually order to strip totally and in the nude march to a delousing showering facility , a cleaning facility . the guard would kick , if I recall correctly , these be Ukrainians that be on the inside of that concentration camp . ukrainian guard in black uniform would kick inmate and they habit be to kick inmate until they curl up on the ground or be too ill to respond .", "ukrainian guard in black uniform would kick inmate and they habit be to kick inmate until they curl up on the ground or be too ill to respond . I do not know how many people die under these kick outburst but I know that they injure many people in that process . when we arrive at the showering process and delousing as they would call it , we go through a room whereby we head be -- we be give a crew cut and the Germans or the ukrainian guard at that time would spit on we head to give they the ability to shave a stripe from front to back so it would wind up like a one to two inch stripe run through a otherwise crew cut , there would be a shave strip . I suppose that this be do so that we would not be able to escape . so in the Gross-Rosen camp , we receive this crew cut and a shave strip through the middle , run from front to back of the head .", "when we arrive at the showering process and delousing as they would call it , we go through a room whereby we head be -- we be give a crew cut and the Germans or the ukrainian guard at that time would spit on we head to give they the ability to shave a stripe from front to back so it would wind up like a one to two inch stripe run through a otherwise crew cut , there would be a shave strip . I suppose that this be do so that we would not be able to escape . so in the Gross-Rosen camp , we receive this crew cut and a shave strip through the middle , run from front to back of the head . the situation inside the Gross-Rosen camp , as I describe before , whenever there be a chance for the ukrainian guard to kick anyone , they enjoy that . I do not recall any killing or hanging inside that camp .", "I recall that Oskar Schindler just come out of jail not long before we come to Brunnlitz -lrb- Brnenec , Czech Republic -rrb- . when we already be in Brunnlitz , this Amon Goeth who conduct all these hanging and shooting and murderous act in Krakow Plaszow also appear in Brunnlitz . at one time , I remember see he but this Amon Goeth be no longer the Amon Goeth of the ss guard with the almighty power but somehow they strip he of all he rank while he be in jail . because he be in jail at that time , as rumor would have it , for steal the transport of food that would arrive into the concentration camp from some jewish organization abroad or Red Cross or something . that he be steal those and he be turn they into gold and diamond and other thing .", "Judge : and what happen to you ? tell we what happen to you . Lou : we be march on top of a huge pile of clothing , and we be old to undress . and we inquire , `` what happen to the people who once wear this clothing ? '' we be tell they go through the chimney .", "so -- I do not know about wa -- oh , when we arrive , I like to go back there . we go in stripe uniform or what -- I do not know how to call it , man take we over . then we go for awhile , and ja -- and polish woman take we over , and I be tell get the -- undress , everybody . and the man be walk around we , you know ? they do not pay any attention to we anyway .", "finally there be not too many . I mean , relatively too much . but we have just hear of what the lageralteste tell we , we see the dead people , and to one side -- we be stand outside , a big van pass by with ma -- with naked body , dead body . very shock . Q : be there people -- be there woman who die in -- in you barracks , in you area , on a regular basis ?", "you could come for seven day . so , you get seven coupon . it be one coupon and you cut off seven strip . at one point , they try to do it for two week , and then somebody else get a turn . how it be decide , administer , as to who get they , or which factory -- that be do behind closed door , I do not know , but there be a lot of protection involve .", "a : no , I do not have a sense . I have never hear of such a thing , and it do not -- it do not really fall into place . Q : but , he tell you he take child into a room and undress they . a : yeah , or molest they . Q : or molest they in some way .", "he come back in subsequent week and month and it be a matter of molestation . the man be impotent , but he do not like to know that or hear about it , and to I it be utterly frightening because at one point I be not even quite sure how you become pregnant until Luba tell I . Q : do he undress you ? a : no . Q : so , he do not -", "a : yes , it be sew the metal frame that go around a shovel that a soldier carry on he belt to dig a trench , and those be sew on a goat or a causa -lrb- ph -rrb- , as you say in a yiddish . that mean you sit on a bench and in front of you be like a head with a vice , with a wooden vice , and you put the leather into -- the two piece of leather into the wooden vice , you have a awl to punch the whole , and then you have a long string with two needle , one right , one leave -- and you sew a double stitch like this , and it be piecework . I mean , they count it , and once in a while , there be ten strip to a unit . once in awhile , we be a strip short , and then you have to go to the foreman , who be a young man we age and you have to do a lot of explain and a lot of excuse , and then you would get another strip , but they be count out carefully because the Germans have ship they carefully . the reason my strip disappear be I steal they .", "that mean you sit on a bench and in front of you be like a head with a vice , with a wooden vice , and you put the leather into -- the two piece of leather into the wooden vice , you have a awl to punch the whole , and then you have a long string with two needle , one right , one leave -- and you sew a double stitch like this , and it be piecework . I mean , they count it , and once in a while , there be ten strip to a unit . once in awhile , we be a strip short , and then you have to go to the foreman , who be a young man we age and you have to do a lot of explain and a lot of excuse , and then you would get another strip , but they be count out carefully because the Germans have ship they carefully . the reason my strip disappear be I steal they . I steal six strip because my shoe have no sole , and I put they in the top of my boot , and I walk through the inspection ; it be like at the airport .", "I mean , they count it , and once in a while , there be ten strip to a unit . once in awhile , we be a strip short , and then you have to go to the foreman , who be a young man we age and you have to do a lot of explain and a lot of excuse , and then you would get another strip , but they be count out carefully because the Germans have ship they carefully . the reason my strip disappear be I steal they . I steal six strip because my shoe have no sole , and I put they in the top of my boot , and I walk through the inspection ; it be like at the airport . they would tap you from neck to the bottom .", "once in awhile , we be a strip short , and then you have to go to the foreman , who be a young man we age and you have to do a lot of explain and a lot of excuse , and then you would get another strip , but they be count out carefully because the Germans have ship they carefully . the reason my strip disappear be I steal they . I steal six strip because my shoe have no sole , and I put they in the top of my boot , and I walk through the inspection ; it be like at the airport . they would tap you from neck to the bottom . occasionally you have to undress , and I only tell about it after I have all six out .", "I steal six strip because my shoe have no sole , and I put they in the top of my boot , and I walk through the inspection ; it be like at the airport . they would tap you from neck to the bottom . occasionally you have to undress , and I only tell about it after I have all six out . nobody know , and people think I must have lose my mind , but I have no sole for the winter . Q : and , then you get somebody to fix they .", "nobody know , and people think I must have lose my mind , but I have no sole for the winter . Q : and , then you get somebody to fix they . a : I get a shoemaker to sole the shoe , and the reason he do not talk be because he could keep half of the strip , and he could sell they for bread . I think it be about the only time I steal . that be why I never buy a pair of boot , never .", "the side be sort of stiff , and -- but they only last one winter or maybe a winter and a half and I come through the sole , and I have frostbite , and they be pull up boot in sort of a nice brown leather , but much too soft for shoe . they be for a hatbox , not for shoe . but I have enough room below the knee to get a thin item into it like a strip of leather , and those I steal . Q : so , why be that you have never buy a pair of boot since then ? a : because I remember those boot .", "and there be a woman who recognize a mother who have be there a while , and she bring extra food , but that be already the next day . from there , they march we those that be fit-looking or not elderly or not child anymore , into a barracks . we be ask to undress , drop all jewelry , fold the clothing neatly , and then they take we to another barracks and they shave we hair , and Dr. Singer 's daughter ask , `` could not we rather have a number ? '' and , the answer be , `` here you take what you get . you do not ask for anything . ''", "she might have be from Romania . I do not know . she do not come with we , though she tell we after a couple of week that there would be a inspection , to undress , take off the rag . there would be a ss inspection team in the center of the count area . we should put the dress over the right arm , and walk pass the three ss man as fast as possible , and one of they motion with a stick or a ride whip , a leather whip , right left , right left .", "so when we get all undressed they keep we for hour , they have we wait for hour on the street . tape # 2 , side 1 -rrb- -rrb- so when you get there and you have to take all you clothes off , what happen ? and they have we wait for hour and hour on the street naked , and those ss man walk around among we , and then they take we in and they separate we . who separate ? the ss .", "Yeh , that be on the next day . where do you sleep on the first day ? by the time they get we off the train , Marilyn , it do not go so fast , by the time they organize we in one place and get we to undress , and then they haul we all into one big barrack , and everyone get shave off the hair , shave off like Dad standing and shaving ; my head wa ... and then they take we into shower , and then we come out and then it be already late in the night , by the time they get we into a barrack and they show you be you bunk bed be go to be , so Manya and I climb up to one , and Hela Shgivatch , and the next morning when we get out 5 o'clock in the morning we get out , `` appel platz '' to be count , by every barrack they get they people out to be count . we get so hysterical when we look at each other the first time without hair , you know . when they get we back , it be in the middle of the night , it be dark , nobody could see nobody , there be never light in the barracks , you could not undress or dress by light , whatever we have to dress or undress , so you could not see what you look , but when it start to get in the morning a little light , daylight would set in .", "by the time they get we off the train , Marilyn , it do not go so fast , by the time they organize we in one place and get we to undress , and then they haul we all into one big barrack , and everyone get shave off the hair , shave off like Dad standing and shaving ; my head wa ... and then they take we into shower , and then we come out and then it be already late in the night , by the time they get we into a barrack and they show you be you bunk bed be go to be , so Manya and I climb up to one , and Hela Shgivatch , and the next morning when we get out 5 o'clock in the morning we get out , `` appel platz '' to be count , by every barrack they get they people out to be count . we get so hysterical when we look at each other the first time without hair , you know . when they get we back , it be in the middle of the night , it be dark , nobody could see nobody , there be never light in the barracks , you could not undress or dress by light , whatever we have to dress or undress , so you could not see what you look , but when it start to get in the morning a little light , daylight would set in . and we look at each other , there be , people get so hysterical , cry , and laughing and , scream . I just can not describe to you the feeling what be be then , we all look like you know what , like we father 's , you know when a girl 's head be shave off , she look just like she father , in Manya I see she father , Manya see in I my father .", "just from day to day , from hour to hour , believe I , you never know , and then they , one day , and then , almost every week , 2-3 time a week they make `` selectzia '' . what do you mean by that ? `` seleczia '' mean a selection of people , they have we all undress and Mengele , you hear about Mengele , the one that be be film now , would you believe that he clap I like this on my back , that bastard . one day , they assemble we all , naked , and Hela , Rusha 's sister , have two other girl at the Plaszow camp , we keep together , Manya and I , and we always try to keep Manya between Hela and I , Rusha 's sister and I , because Manya have scar , from operation , and if he see a scar , or a pimple on somebody , and you do not look good anymore , you go here ; you do not know where you be go , but we assume . so we try to keep Manya between we , but he say `` March , march '' , so when I come by he say to I `` die vet noch gut arbeit leissen '' that I will produce a lot of work yet , so we all go by and we be lucky , we could go and get dress again .", "what do you mean by that ? `` seleczia '' mean a selection of people , they have we all undress and Mengele , you hear about Mengele , the one that be be film now , would you believe that he clap I like this on my back , that bastard . one day , they assemble we all , naked , and Hela , Rusha 's sister , have two other girl at the Plaszow camp , we keep together , Manya and I , and we always try to keep Manya between Hela and I , Rusha 's sister and I , because Manya have scar , from operation , and if he see a scar , or a pimple on somebody , and you do not look good anymore , you go here ; you do not know where you be go , but we assume . so we try to keep Manya between we , but he say `` March , march '' , so when I come by he say to I `` die vet noch gut arbeit leissen '' that I will produce a lot of work yet , so we all go by and we be lucky , we could go and get dress again . but then , this , be this in April 1944 ?", "a : no . Q : No . so you be very careful how you dress and undress -- a : careful how I dress and undress and all that , and do not forget I -- we never -- we never base -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- always have this -- you know there be just a -- just you wash you -- th-the lower part of you body do not get much -- much sanitation as it be , you know . you just wash the upper body , the foot or leg and this and that , so -- so I never -- th-there -- there be no -- there be no shower , you know , and then --", "Q : No . so you be very careful how you dress and undress -- a : careful how I dress and undress and all that , and do not forget I -- we never -- we never base -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- always have this -- you know there be just a -- just you wash you -- th-the lower part of you body do not get much -- much sanitation as it be , you know . you just wash the upper body , the foot or leg and this and that , so -- so I never -- th-there -- there be no -- there be no shower , you know , and then -- Q : right , right .", "Q : right , right . a : -- or bath or anything like that . but -- but when I undress , sure , at night , dressi -- undress and dress , always -- because that be there , it be there , I -- I know , I be aware of it , and -- and there be no doubt about it , that -- Q : and nobody question you that you be do some -- you be dress and undress in a way -- a : not at all , no --", "a : -- or bath or anything like that . but -- but when I undress , sure , at night , dressi -- undress and dress , always -- because that be there , it be there , I -- I know , I be aware of it , and -- and there be no doubt about it , that -- Q : and nobody question you that you be do some -- you be dress and undress in a way -- a : not at all , no -- Q : No .", "I have a principle -- if somebody be stick it will be I , not the baby . and I get stick a few time , you know with the pin , but I will not stick he . but I take care of the baby and I get the milk back , too , that be such a lovely thing , when you baby get a bottle and all of a sudden this mess be all over you and the only thing you can do be make they comfortable and then you go to the bathroom and undress . that be all you can do . and we do everything together .", "there be no privacy . and if they think you do not wash yourself good enough they come with the big spray hose and spray ice cold water over you , midwinter , and it be cold . Q : people be naked , no clothes on ! a : no , you have to take everything off . it be in the morning .", "it be a special barrack with shower in they , and then you all go in there and you get a shower . it be pretty hot , nice and warm , and you get one towel for three people , and then let you dry outside . you go outside naked and you have to dry yourself -- if you be number three you get a wet towel . in the winter it be not too nice . but it be one of the thing to make you feel real small , to bring you down .", "I be not say that in the larger camp there be not a more systematic way for the german to kill off people , as much as they could . they have certain way to keep you always on you toe . since something could happen , once when we be in the arbeits-commando outside the camp , you know , and work in the forest or so , all of a sudden one day we come as one of these big ss officer come , we have to take all we clothes off -- we stand there , a couple of hundred people all naked -- and we have to dig a ditch . so we think right away : `` well , there we go ! '' for we know that it happen , that you have to dig a ditch and then they come with the machine gun , `` Brrrt ! ''", "for we know that it happen , that you have to dig a ditch and then they come with the machine gun , `` Brrrt ! '' and they all fall in the ditch , and they close the ditch and that be it . so , when we have to dig the ditch , stand there naked , and we think , `` well , that be the end of we . '' I never see so many people stand there and pray , hope that something would happen . and it really happen .", "Q : I read from someone who be in the camp and who say , '' how can you believe in the goodness of man , anymore . in the camp everyone fight against everybody else . '' what he be say be that the protection which society with its mores and law give each of we be strip away there , so you just have people , almost like animal , fight each other , at least more openly fight each other . and that after such a experience he could not believe in the goodness of man anymore . the truth about man be that man be a evil animal .", "how much worse it be every day , every day you get a spoon more of misery . Life in camp be really not show . show a bunch of dead people lay naked there in heap . well , that be a normal sight for we , I mean . at least 100 or 200 people on a heap , lay there wait to be cremate .", "a : that be a very good point . the french interned my family as be german citizen . although the Germans have strip they of they citizenship -lrb- by the Nuremberg law -rrb- , they have to be examine -lrb- before be free individually -rrb- . later on they be reintern and reexamine because the french want to make sure that they have no traitor , no foreign agent , in they midst . otherwise say : everyone of german birth , who do not have any other citizenship - specifically make sure that Americans , who do have US citizenship , even if they be bear in Germany , be not part of that .", "we drive to bingen through the Rhine Gorge . it be a gorge and that be what you call it in this country ; over there it be a `` valley . '' it be a fairly narrow strip which contain the Rhine river , which be by that time more than halfway down to the sea . the river be constrain to be only 90 foot wide so it flow rather rapidly . it be the area of the `` Mauseturm '' -lrb- the tower on a island where , the legend have it , mouse go to devour a wicked Bishop who have take refuge there from he flock -rrb- , the Niebelungen rock and the legend of the `` Lorelei '' -lrb- the maiden who sit on top of a rock and enchant the boatmen to forget about the rock and so he do drown in the river -rrb- .", "a : thing change naturally when the war break out , between Germany and France -lrb- that be September 30 , 1939 -rrb- in 1939 . Q : then what happen ? a : we have to report to the -lrb- `` we '' mean all the adult male 17 through 55 , then extend to the age of 60 , within the week , who either be german or have be german before they be strip of they citizenship by the Nuremberg law -rrb- stadium in Paris . the Stadium de Colomb , all the Germans and all the Austrians -lrb- Austria have be annex to Germany in 1938 -rrb- . there be no money to be bring with you .", "Q : what be you mother 's position ? a : yes , I listen to the tape -lrb- of the interview with Margaret Ebert -rrb- , but I do remember she while I be grow up . I do not remember she working in the law firm -lrb- obviously mean Paul Ebert 's law firm -rrb- where my father work , because he quit too early -lrb- after 1934 Jews be strip of they licens to practice law . Medicine etc. -rrb- and try to sell insurance . after that my mother work for the HIAS -lrb- Hebrew Immigrant Society -rrb- to try to get people out -lrb- of Germany -rrb- .", "and intentionally -- no absorption . they intentionally keep they out . what do the Egyptians , we ally now , the Egyptians -- what do they do with these camp in the Gaza Strip , with these refugee camp ? after Israel take over , let 's face it , I think they live with luxury compare with what they live now . of course , it be hard on they , but , for heaven 's sake , we have to stop sometimes .", "Q : but to bother to move you , use railroad stock to do it -lrb- when they need for railroad stock elsewhere and for military purpose be most urgent -rrb- and yet you be all die along the way . a : yes . the example be : when they undress we -- you know , take away the watch , the clothes , etc. , you have to have every piece of clothing in a separate container . it have to be precise . they have a bag for watch , they have a bag for tooth , they have a bag for glass , for ring , etc. .", "that be when we get there they must have just set up that camp because we first assignment be build barracks and we be later then assign . Q : when you get to this Buna what happen to you clothes ? a : we be tell to strip completely naked at the time . this be the eastern part of Germany and still very , very cold , and I remember we have to strip completely naked and run completely naked from one block , mean barrack to another barrack and there we be wait for some instruction or whatnot . I remember wait .", "Q : when you get to this Buna what happen to you clothes ? a : we be tell to strip completely naked at the time . this be the eastern part of Germany and still very , very cold , and I remember we have to strip completely naked and run completely naked from one block , mean barrack to another barrack and there we be wait for some instruction or whatnot . I remember wait . it be very , very cold .", "what we have see now slowly dawn on we , we be see murder in front of we eye and so that be the very first beginning , and then we be send to have we number tattoo . we be not call by name anymore we be only call by number . we hair be shave off completely and we be assign one thin striped suit and we be assign to certain block , mean that be where we belong and that be the early beginning , and then naturally when you be strip of all you dignity by realize you be non more name , there be only a number , by have you hair shave off and by be force to run naked around by not have the most natural rights in any manner , you notice right away that this be something out of the extraordinary . naturally you be confront with a situation which I suppose create a period in we life which at that time which at that time of complete despair or complete inability to cope with you own survival , and that be why during the very early period , I remember distinctly , many people in my block walk into a loaded wire because they psychologically could not cope with that first period that you be not a human being , that you be worse than a animal . they just could not cope with it and they be run every day i remember notice people hang on these laded wire , who just could not take it , and that be the very early part , the first few day of we be there .", "naturally you be confront with a situation which I suppose create a period in we life which at that time which at that time of complete despair or complete inability to cope with you own survival , and that be why during the very early period , I remember distinctly , many people in my block walk into a loaded wire because they psychologically could not cope with that first period that you be not a human being , that you be worse than a animal . they just could not cope with it and they be run every day i remember notice people hang on these laded wire , who just could not take it , and that be the very early part , the first few day of we be there . Q : when you first start see this , as you say , the murder , the strip of one dignity , how be you able little by little to cope ? a : good question . I have ask myself this many , many time .", "this type , these be the work shoe , and only the privileged , studen aldeste or kapo , block aldeste they be allow because they be the privileged type of people . they be allow , they get special permission from the ss to wear good shoe . they have a better type of a suit strip yes , but high class , they have they make by tailor from we own people who have be tailor , they get custom make while everyone else have to take what be give to they while walk through these section where they be assign , these privileged people include these I mention take off these shoe and give these people the normal type of shoe assign . Q : be there ever a chance , how do one become a block aldeste or a kapo or ... . .", "Q : but do they give they ? a : yes they do . somehow they have a way of , they could not strip we . we have to have some sort of bare necessity . but of course the thing that happen , while we be work with the construction we have to insulate -lrb- word miss in original transcript -rrb- , and they give you something like I would call it today fiberglass , and one of we stupid girl say I have a idea , it be cotton wool and she use it for she period .", "a : you have no idea . I mean I be in Auschwitz and I see the buring and I could not grab the idea . it be three day when I be in Auschwitz and I see naked people walk towards the gas chamber . I think I be dream -- I just could not grab it . and they come in -- people -- be the ss come in I do not know and they look at we number and you know I have a number there and I probably be like in a dream -- I mean I could not grad this whole thing what be go on there -- and after they be out , I ask why do they look at the number ?", "and then one day , ja , everyday , for instance , when we come there , we have already everyday a shower , a sauna . a sauna be call -- it be a big place and there be just one shower next to the other and everybody get undressed and take they shower and then we be stand a little bit until we dry up and then we put everything on again . one day we be stand there , it be after I be there a short time , naked , stark naked we be stand there and the leiter form the camp come in - you know he be in court , it be in the paper he be put to death -- he name be Hessler . and at this time he be plead he be so good to the girl and nobody say a good word for he . he be put to death .", "he be put to death . I wish I could have go -- I would have tell they all the goodness he do in the camp . we be stand there all naked and he come in . I mean he could not have wait until we be dress ? I mean we be stark naked , he walk in , all the soldier walk in -- you just be not a human be anymore .", "we be stand there all naked and he come in . I mean he could not have wait until we be dress ? I mean we be stark naked , he walk in , all the soldier walk in -- you just be not a human be anymore . okay , I manage to stand in the back but people have to stand in the front too . and he be stand there and hold a speech -- there be a munitions factory there and he say up to now , no jew ever work there because we be not trustworthy .", "so he give we the charcoal . you know here and there , there be still a few german and you know what two girl do . they take two well dress german woman and they undress they in the street . Q : I want to ask you , you must have come in contact with german during those first few day and week . how do you feel towards they ?", "we not ask anything -- we be just ask to eat because we be hungry . Q : where there any instance of violence against the Germans ? a : no , just that they undress they but you know the Americans they behave unbelievable . one night we go and this cook we have with we -- she say would you like good chicken soup -- that be so cute . so you know what she do -- there be a peasant living there and some chicken run around .", "Q. Men and woman together ? a. Sure . we never undress completely . you would be surprised how good you can sleep without change clothes and very often , I notice that I go to bed with my shoe still on . Q .", "I be carry that and they be debate about it -- they finally throw it on the floor and it go into a million piece and I just put the case into my pocket . anyway , I miss the train and I have to wait in Aachen for a few hour and in the meantime whenever one of these ss guy come around I get a slap in the face , or something like this , you know , real hero . and then I have to undress and they look up into the , you know , all place . by the way , I have a wonderful revenge . the first city , as a american gi , that we occupy in Germany be Aachen , the same place , and we have take a entire bunch of 200 of the border ss that we have take prisoner and who be in one compound .", "it be sort of a sweet revenge . they be very embarrassed . it be the middle of the winter and they have to undress in the courtyard and look up each other ' rectum and thing like that which they have do to I and so on . Q : as a sixteen year old boy travel alone I be sure you be quite frightened . g : well , I be amazingly ... I admire myself in a sense afterwards because I be amazingly compose there .", "and probably in pretty good shape , compare to some of the other . Q : and then you say you be put back into row , and then what happen ? a : then we be march into another part of the camp and take to a barracks where we have to undress and throw away all belongings except we shoe and a belt , I remember . and we be chase through a cold shower . by that time it must have be around midnight and we stand shiver in the night air there until we be dry and formed line in row of five .", "-lrb- laugh -rrb- we could not be mistake for anybody else . we be , by that time , walk skeleton . we have we hair shear , and only one strip of hair in the center . we have these blue and while striped uniform . and we be guard by heavily armed ss as if we would be the most precious possession that the world would have to offer .", "we do not know anything about Auschwitz . and about a month after they be send out , a packet come to my aunt from Auschwitz of she husband 's clothing follow by a telegram that he have die in Auschwitz . and when she look at the clothing , she could not believe it , because my uncle evidently use to undress with the shirt and the undershirt take off at the same time . and the shirt and the undershirt be take off at the same time . we do not know about Auschwitz , or what they be do to people in Auschwitz , so we assume that the telegram be a fake .", "it be a de-licing process . we get there the beginning of April , I think . we have to sit naked outside , leave everything except we shoe and belt . and go into the shower . come out from the shower and dunk the shoe and the belt in a certain solution .", "but they do not cut like this , because they want a opening on the Mediterranean . so it cut like this , and so the whole part of Bordeaux , the whole southwest of France be in . Q : you be close to the Mediterranean , but the Germans want to have a strip along the Mediterranean . a : no , we be parallel to the Atlantic . the Atlantic be here .", "they be put in freight train , and each of these freight `` wagon '' be completely close , and they pack the people in to the point that it be usually could be twenty people , let 's say twenty soldier , would be in , but this time they put hundred people , old , young , without any water , and they lock it and the train eventually go to somewhere . when this be describe , the circumstance , it become very obvious to I and to all of we that the future of those people be very gloomy , and this be something much more serious than a matter of take away this , or take away that , from certain people . it be a matter of life-threatening situation , and they , of course , be completely strip of they whole property . from there on , then , I have personally no , whatsoever , expectation from the Germans except to be kill . Q : then until 1944 , until the german invasion , you have mobilization , there be a hungarian army , that be fight ...", "we know about the digging , too , because the word get to we before it even start , but as they tell we , that be go to be for keep potato for the winter -lrb- laugh -rrb- so , I know exactly where it happen . and then when I read the book it describe exactly what they do . they tell they to undress . and they kill they one on top of the other . that be what they do .", "instead of the Nazis allow proper distribution of food , they want to see those people , like mad dog , how they be scramble . you know , when people be hungry , they kill each other for a slice of bread . so most of the people kill on that particular section -- on that strip -- they be fight to get that small bread . we come to Mauthausen , and supposedly we be suppose to get out . and we hear -- all , everything be a rumor mill -- we will not be allow to get out because there be no room leave , because there be many camp , from other place in Poland that they come here before we , and they fill up the camp .", "I guess I can not talk too much about it . my mother be bear of five child ; and nobody make it . when I think she have to be with allt hese strange people , naked ... Q : do they make all of you take you clothes off ? a : yes .", "one guy from we city be Cholmo . be a big , big guy . and Goett come with two dog , big dog , and he tell he to undress himself . everybody be watch . and he give the order to the two dog -- they tear he apart !", "and then they would take the ash out and put they into urn and sell they to they family or relative and so on , in any kind of way . that image of those furnace , of that kind of building , still haunt I to this day . he also tell we about the laundry of the building , and how they strip body and put they in there . and this be the picture that be to be replicate and duplicated , that we see in the other place that be liberate just within a short time after that . well , I have my driver with I - we company be white officer and black enlist man , who have also , of course , be deprive a bit - and one of the reason why I think we have a good guide be that my driver , who be black , be probably one of the first black to have a tour here of Buchenwald .", "and I recall during April of 1970 , after the intrusion into Cambodia and a few other event that happen in the ` 70s , I still recall some graduate student all exercise and upset over the military , and that it be go to widen the war in Viet Nam , and the chinese and Russians be go to come in by all of we activity and I say , `` no . '' and I recall tell some rabid , very active group here that I be more concerned about what be happen in Egypt . they be pooh-pooh , over whether the russian mig be buzz the israeli plane on the Gaza strip , and they be ready to take over , until we get word to the egyptian government about what the Russians be do , and they kick they out . but that save the Middle East . otherwise , the Russians be ready to take over .", "after my father and brother be take away from we , my mother and sister stay together . it be a very traumatic checking-in process . we have to undress . we come to a building where we have to proceed , let 's say , like from one room to the next . I have some slide of it I use when I present something on World War II or on camp -- a reel of slide that we family take in 1974 when we be in Germany .", "in the middle be a table , and there be a ss man in a white coat . we come in batch of several woman . we have to take we clothes off before we go in , and we be totally naked . my mother and sister , of course , we hold on together . I can not even describe now the feeling , how you feel in a situation like this .", "throw out every book . they be such idiot , you know . they would see naked figure , and they say , `` those dirty schwein jew . '' there be a Michelangelo . Q : where be this ?", "be you still in Hamburg ? a : Hamburg . they see Michelangelos and they would say , `` that dirty jew have naked figure . '' so it be just ridiculous . but they throw everything out .", "I be get angry when people tell I , `` all the Jews just go '' like sheep to the slaughter '' that be not true ! yes , some do , and they could not do anything else ! I would like to know what people would do if you be strip naked with dog on you . what else can you do ! in fact , I be tell that one of my uncle , be one of the leader , and he go in with the sh ' ma Yisroel -- somebody who have see it tell I that .", "they try to cross . if they do not quite make it , the spanish bullet hit they and they die . we find a naked man in the bush when he make it . the world be crazy . I tell you that .", "this have nothing to do with religion , nothing to do because you be afraid . this have to do with they get gun and machine gun , and a lot of army . you stand naked ! Q : and what do you teach you child about power ? about this act of survival ?", "half-burned body be still in the oven where they have be leave as the Germans flee . beside the oven be the emaciated body of prisoner they have not have time to burn . they be naked , stack like cordwood as you would you fireplace wood . further down be slat-sided cart that be also fill with body . these cart be use to bring the body from the gas chamber .", "I think , `` I be in a jungle between white people . '' that be how the people look to I . woman , girl , almost naked , shave completely . and the face from the sun . it must have be there so hot , or I do not know .", "I could not bend down and give it to they , because we be forbid to talk to they and we pass very quickly , but as unobtrusively as I could , I throw away two loaf of bread I have . then we walk into a bath installation . we be tell to undress completely and line up and give up we jewelry . I have a watch and I have a very lovely small diamond ring , my mother 's engagement ring . I do not want to give it to the ss .", "fortunately cold water come out . then we stand shiver , in another room . they leave we alone , and after several hour they issue either strip uniform or a ragged , very tear piece of civilian clothing . then we be tell to line up , and we march for several mile again to another part of the camp -- into barracks number 20 , I recall -- and we be seat , pack like sardine , in fives . we be seat with we leg cross .", "they would stand up when they search they , and they hold that thing in they hand like this . up there . they would search they all over but the thing they be look for -- they be really look for food -- they have a list and if they have jewelry on it , they would have strip they . but they be look , really for food , because people get really inventive . they use to take a salami and put it right in front and close to the jacket , or a loaf of bread .", "since we be there -- the Jews -- they think we should get the shot , too . but they want to show the difference between the Germans and the Jews , so they get two shot , we get one shot . -lrb- laughter -rrb- we all have to strip to the waist . I have from my wife a man 's ring , a wide one , and she have make two ring out of it . I be the only guy who be engage to a wife where the wife buy he the ring .", "I make myself a little cover and I wear it around my neck on a chain under my shirt , so nobody know about it , because we be not allow to have it . you get so use to it , you do not pay attention to it anymore . and the guy go up there and they say , `` Strip you shirt off . '' I take off the shirt , and this young ss doctor in he 30s give we the shot . and he come up to I , he say , `` what have you get there ? ''", "Q : can you remember any of the book and film that you have read or see that you think be worthwhile ? a : I and my wife have a book there which be from Latvia , take from german picture of Europe . they be show scene in Latvia where the Germans actually take picture where the woman be stand at the grave naked . and you may have see those picture someplace . this book be print by the Russians !", "do you know what you be here for ? '' and they be quite open about it . but the order keep be shout very quickly , `` Ger undress ! line up here ! line up there ! ''", "there be lot of people . two huge trench be dig out , as I see with my own eye . and they put layer and layer of dead body , they have to be undressed -- man and woman , it do not make any difference -- they undress they . they fill up the bottom of the trench . they pour calcium on top of it .", "a : that be the extermination barracks . about two or three week later , I happen to be fortunate to meet Dr. Mengele who be overlook this last transfer where I belong if there be anyone strong enough to be send out . that be the so-called selection where I be stand naked with many hundred other raise my left arm . we have to raise we left arm because that be show whether we rib show under the skin . if we be too thin there be no point in send we out and give we a piece of bread and take we to force labor because we could not stand it .", "if we be too thin there be no point in send we out and give we a piece of bread and take we to force labor because we could not stand it . I be select and in about two more week I be send with many other this time already with a dress and a coat and shoe . Q : during the selection you be naked ? a : yes , we have just one sheet of clothes which be throw at we and we have to put it on and whatever shoe you could find because shoe be very important if you have a infection on you foot , you be go to the gas chamber . Q : and all the other people who be in this barracks be exterminate ?", "they pick out 60 people from this group , I be among they , and they take we to the Camp . and while we be walk away from the other we hear they shoot all the rest . be not that terrible -- and they have they take off all the clothes , naked , and shoot they all . I be save . my brother be already there , and my mother , too .", "that be what you ask I . every one whom they select have to walk in the middle of the room with a platform like this . and like martyr they have to walk naked . and , eh , again , ah , ah , either leave or right , either she stay , or she have to go on this side . at that time we know already she go to the gas .", "and then they order we for work . I do not finish with the selection . the girl be naked , you mention . five ss and they have to parade to and fro and if she be too thin , she , if she have something on like this , I have now , she go to the gas chamber . Q : it be very humiliating .", "there be girl with typhus , they be on the carriage , and they be shoot in front of we , all of they -- thirty . then there be hut where the girl who be carrier of typhus ... they have typhus but they do not know it , but they be carry the bug . so they be separate too , naked of course . they be shoot in front of we . then we start to walk , it be marsh .", "it be so -- so -- every german , I think , be a -- think of a sadist because that be the nature of they . when we come to Auschwitz , as I say to you , we have to go to the road and they cut off we hair . I get such hysterical -- ah -- laugh -- laugh cramp that I start to rub and I see my friend -- they look -- like -lrb- word miss in original transcript -rrb- , I start through the shower , the Germans be stand there naked -- I have to rush through the shower , you know . such thing , unbelievable . or they take all we -- we dress and they throw we .", "because from Auschwitz you be send to different camp . Q : who provide you with thing like clothing ? a : Clothing come from Dachau you know the strip , the strip suit . Came from Dachau to Auschwitz . Q : Stripped , striped suit like prison suit ?", "Q : Stripped , striped suit like prison suit ? a : Yah . they come from you know and then you get it of course , you know , one shirt which be full of lice , you know , there be always the lice but you know you get a strip suit . you be always to wear a strip suit . Q : so if you run away you would easily be identify by the striped suit ?", "a : Yah . they come from you know and then you get it of course , you know , one shirt which be full of lice , you know , there be always the lice but you know you get a strip suit . you be always to wear a strip suit . Q : so if you run away you would easily be identify by the striped suit ? a : no , you could not run away .", "we little upholstery of fat under the skin . you become very emaciated . what I do not say earlier be that first thing that happen , of course , be you be strip of all you civilian clothes . you be shave from head to toe and that you be deal some prisoner clothes , striped , synthetic or cotton suit , no underwear , rarely sock and wooden shoe . that be you uniform .", "behind the road be about 12 or something people what they catch . between they be one jewish woman with a young child . they have to undress , nude . they have already the grave already . and they have to line up in front of the grave and they shoot one after the other .", "and matter of fact , they tell we Himmler come a few time around to look how it be build . so , I get in and we be ... first two day we do not do nothing . just ... first of all we have to undress , nude . and go through entlausung ... that be lice ... to clean ... Q : delousing .", "a : delousing , yeah . and shave the head . they shave we head , and then they give we strip suit . and they give we barracks , where to stay . then come around .", "you be lucky to have a pair of shoe . you be lucky nobody steal you shirt . it be some day when we do not work , you walk around almost naked . you use to wash what you have , dry it up and put it on again . that be the procedure .", "when I come in it be still judenlager -lrb- jewish camp -rrb- but then end of , I think 1942 , it become concentration camp . they give we ... we change from the civilian we have only the mark , no hair , and the yellow star . and then they switch it over ... it be such a bitter cold ... in the winter ... we be stand outside naked and they give we just a jacket and a pair of pants and some kind of shoe and nothing else . it be bitter cold . you almost freeze to death .", "he would walk we down to the first , the first building where I do not remember . I remember walk in and there be , uh , a very large room . we be tell to undress . yeah . we be tell to undress .", "we be tell to undress . yeah . we be tell to undress . I pull my precious little thing I have knit so many nice sweater and I be always keep they in a neat place . we be folding they up and put they in a neat pile against the wall .", "that be one of my better possession -lrb- laugh -rrb- . my hair , it be long and very . Q : and how dehumanizing , to be make to undress . a : that be a moment when you really feel it . yes .", "it be in , even in you short hair . it would even get into that . so we be naked and this man be , uh , operate this whole , shower -lrb- laugh -rrb- business . and we be not . we be not give any towel to dry off .", "only I have a couple high boot . they leave I that . along when we be stand naked , along come a man , he have - barbe . I : a band ? r : a band with the name `` Barbe . ''", "r : Yah . and then they come to Auschwitz . take a bath in january , naked cold . I do not know how people could overlive that point already . stand in the hallway , draft , naked , wet ...", "take a bath in january , naked cold . I do not know how people could overlive that point already . stand in the hallway , draft , naked , wet ... I : in the wintertime ? r : in January .", "it just -- when be my future , where be , where be I go ? nothing , that just go too . so , now you be just , ah , like a , a little animal , and , ah , they kind of , they kind of wait around and -- un a big hole to be examine again -- we be go in front of -- and there be line -- naked -- and we be go to the doctor , you know , we be go to be examine . what work we should we do in there ? who be suit for , for kind of work ?", "what work we should we do in there ? who be suit for , for kind of work ? so , we go through that -- well , we to the hole -- we go to the doctor , they say ... you be naked , you stand at this one -- be naked -- it kind of embarrassed -- and , ah , ah , I faint . I just collapse . there be no food .", "it be not the practice , apparently , to cremate every day . a concrete building be use as a temporary rest place . here the body be strip and pile up like cordwood . it seem incomprehensible , but 40 body be there , stone dead , stack four high and sprinkle with lime . all be similar to the body previously describe .", "Q : with the board ... a : Yah , with the board . it really ... it be a piece of wood ... a strip of wood ... you know , like this ... Q : yes . a : Yah , and it be a strip of wood , so you could not see it , and you could open this up , and they be sleep in that .", "it really ... it be a piece of wood ... a strip of wood ... you know , like this ... Q : yes . a : Yah , and it be a strip of wood , so you could not see it , and you could open this up , and they be sleep in that . they have the mattress in it and they be sleep during the night . Q : in other word , you be able to open that panel , and there be a mattress behind it , and that be where they sleep during the night .", "we give they the best medical treatment we possibly could , we have call in hospital unit there and they get the best that could be get . let I tell you a little bit how , let I expand upon what happen to the people after they be separate into these unit . the old and inform , people they could not use for anything be tell to undress that they clothes would be send some place to a delousing station . they undress , they be give a bar of soap and a towel . they be then take into a large building , clean as it could possibly be , I should not say as clean as it possibly could be , it be clean , it be very clean .", "let I tell you a little bit how , let I expand upon what happen to the people after they be separate into these unit . the old and inform , people they could not use for anything be tell to undress that they clothes would be send some place to a delousing station . they undress , they be give a bar of soap and a towel . they be then take into a large building , clean as it could possibly be , I should not say as clean as it possibly could be , it be clean , it be very clean . it have a large sign over it : Baden which mean shower bath .", "A. Well , they come . they need some 1000 woman . so we be stand again , five in a row , and we have to parade in front of Dr. Mengele , stark naked , of course , and I guess he feel that we would be strong enough to go to work , so we be amongst the 1000 woman . um . they take we into Germany , with cattle car again , of course , and the trip be also about a week .", "sb : be it hot in there ? mg : terrible hot . we be uh practically naked you know because it be a small whole and it be not no wall and uh nothing -- you know a hole in ground . but be be a under -- I mean there be a shed on top -- so under the floor they have dig out the man . I do not know how many be there 30 -- 40 -- 50 people .", "mg : well when we be on the dock . they go already to each house and they start to shoot and they start - ed to burn because they know that people be hide and some even come out run . you know also be very poorly dress because I be sure in each hide place it be the same situation like in ours so people start to undress they clothes and some be catch and some probably be shoot . because we hear -- we hear shot too . so some be kill on the spot and uh.sb : Um , e -- but you make you way from the hiding place to the", "it be very hot . it be in the summer I believe . we strip we clothing off , intentionally to be able to stay there . and the air be foul and uh there be no toilet facility . uh , it become very very difficult to just exist in that environment .", "at least , temporarily . and everybody be look forward and not look to the side , not to make any eye - contact with the german or anything like that . so uh I do not recall my surroundings other than I be very miserable , uncomfortable and uh half naked and uh go into uh march -- be march to the railroad siting . sb : and the grenade ? have it go off ?", "people use to have to relieve themselves go to one corner and relieve themselves there and uh cover it up I guess the with the -- the dirt in the basement uh . uh it get so hot that everybody take they clothes off , just about . and we be uh half naked in there . it be uh dark uh I guess the primary reason be because we do not want to be detect some how by a crack of light come out at night so the german could spot we . uh and we sit there for uh day I say .", "there be hide place under the house yes and many people survive in those hide place . but many people they , they , they take they out of that hide place and bring they to the assembly point where we assemble . a friend of mine , they come it be so hot in those hide place that they come nearly naked yes . anyway in Stutthof they take every - thing away from we yes so it do not matter that they have not . and then we be give pajamas yes and then we be only wonder that we shower have water and not gas in they .", "bud brodecki Page 4 register I be go to Russia , you know . and i-i-i - somebody call I , i-i leave for a minute I come back and a truck take off without I so . there be some heartbreaking , I do not know where I be go , I be so ... you come out from something naked without no belongings and you really do not , it do not matter where you go you have no family , no place . we do not really want to go back to Poland we hear some bad story about Poland what be go on in there . SWB : so tell I how you end up come to Lansdberg .", "he even write a book , and that be where I find out about he existence because in those day , SWB : you do not know . bud brodecki : I do not know , I have no idea . SWB : tell I again the story of when you be in the public bath after the liberation and when everyone sort of forget they be naked and start look for people who know where they family be . work transcript : not spell check or verify for accuracy . Wentworth film liberation/dp proj .", "so , suddenly we all start turn around from curiosity look for familiar face . and some couple even recognize each other . not that they be related , or maybe they be neighbor and they be hug , and nobody give it even a thought of be naked , I mean there be , -lsb- laugh -rsb- you know today they would make a x-rated movie here . but there be nobody uh , work transcript : not spell check or verify for accuracy . Wentworth film liberation/dp proj .", "NESSE GODIN Page 2 hole serve as a bathroom , they put some stick on . and the other hole serve as a grave . every morning , the dead be order to be take out , they be have to be under as naked , because the clothing could be recycle , but the people be dump into the hole . Food be give to we very little . you see the Germans do not get at that point allocation food for we for the prisoner .", "JOE KAHOE Page 2 who have be release and we warn , particularly about feed they . to be careful when they come on out . so as we proceed down the road and this happen and this happen for day and day eh we would see they come with those strip uniform . they be all eh real skinny , emaciated , and the fact they be starve , so we be they be warn not give they anything to eat , because all we have be those K ration . they be highly concentrated and if they eat those thing they it it might kill they .", "and then she add to that , I bring it from the ghetto . of course this , -lsb- laugh -rsb- this be a kind of excitement because I know the procedure by this time , that you could not take anything into , in-into a concentration camp . -lsb- cough -rsb- people be strip of any possession they have and there be no way of carry a prayer book into a camp and uh hold onto it , and I of course ask , how do you do it , and she tell I that when they give she she first working transcript : not spell check or verify for accuracy . Wentworth film liberation/dp 2/10/95 RABBI ABRAHAM KLAUSNER Page 7 allocation of bread , they give she a heel of a loaf , and she cut or tear a slice but not completely , make a hinge of it . and then dig out the crumb in the heel of a loaf of the bread , and put she little prayer book and carry the bread with she and of course bread be something you be not go to , you be not go to steal one from the other , and so forth .", ". and we be ________ for several hour , almost the whole day before the we be receive by Dachau , by the ______ of Dachau . and it finally we have be put in we eh eh eh accept eh eh eh and in we eh eh and signed-up or and give the number and take to shower and after that I be completely naked . everything have be take from I , all of my belongings that I bring from eh eh __________ elsbrook ???? and eh my uniform , old uniform , inhale ... and they and eh it be not a give anything that be eh that be eh eh use in Dachau .", "instead , you know , instead , I have a blanket . I wrap around the blanket and I stay seven eh day this way . it have one good thing , because we do not have to go work , because we be naked , yeah , but we only have to participate in a roll-call three time a day . so umb ... cough . .", "I find out later from the Holocaust people that they have identify this guard who the next day have be kill by a prisoner who have just have enough I think , and take a board and hit he over the head and kill he . we be not there for that event , but I think it happen quite frequently throughout the camp . also , you must remember that the as these camp be overrun in the Landsberg/Kaufering area , many of the prisoner either escape or be release through open gate and be wander down the road and some of the most pitiful sight we see be these inmate in all stage of undress with striped pajamas on or with with very little clothes on at all , wander down the road in a very dazed and glazed-eye condition . they beg for food , they be not sure who we they be tell that we be american troops and seem overjoyed . back to the camp for a moment , we be particularly impressed with the joy with which they greet the american troops .", "there be no work in Majdanek itself , except in the field a little bit , and the kitchen . there be a roll call every day and those choose go to the gas chamber . Hirayama do they strip everybody naked , take they clothes and shoe , when they send people to the gas chamber ? Rozenberg they claim everything from we when we first enter the camp , and send to the shower . some go to shower with water , some go to shower with gas .", "the german commando , they be stand in front of the tank . they tie they down there evidently , I do not know . and they -- with no medal , they strip they of all the medal , but I do not see that . I still see the Nazis . I say , `` what you talk about , here they be . ''", "once I go to Berea and talk to the Berea class , and that be the worst . they be just uninterested , sleepy people with a professor who , himself , put I asleep . I just could not blame the student , by that time , they be so turn off , that no matter what I do , I could have strip nude , and it would not have make much of a difference in that class . but the middle-school kid , the junior high , they be just great to talk to . one girl ... just yesterday , I be speak to a class , and one little girl stay behind , and I usually spend about a hour and a half with they .", "these be Player cigarette , which come in metal can at the time , and I remember he make those into a piggy bank for myself . and that continue for a long time . he buy I comic book , because he know there be one comic strip that I really enjoy call `` panda '' which be really just only find in Holland , and he would always buy I the little book , and I -- I really enjoy those . so we -- we really have a very , very close relationship . and that -- that continue to the very end of he life when he die at age 96 .", "that I do not see . that be direct go to the boat or something . I really do not know what be ... that have metal strip around it and all that kind of stuff . I go to Paris . I have a boyfriend there .", "so I go to the coal mine and I say : `` if you give I a pencil , a black one , a red one , I will bring you the most beautiful silk shirt . so the polish coal miner say `` if you do not bring I , I will kill you . '' at that time they be not give we strip uniform ; they be give we shirt from people who be kill . I say ` okay , but give I one week 's time . '' so I make sure they catch I for the laundry detail .", "WH : how be you able to make it ? BG : the war be over , what happen be , they choose I into a group to go and dig and dig trench , and , first of all two thing . I be lucky I be only with lithuanian jewish girl , of course we go through in the camp all this horror which be familiar , and one day we stand like a vase , all naked , they choose 400-500 girl - that time I be 15 or so , -lrb- she voice soften and lower -rrb- and um , my hair be shave off by then . we do not get a number , it be already late , it be in July ' 44 . WH : how long be you in Stutthof ?", "but in Belzec they do mention , because they do this right after the war in 1945 , and that time there be still a group of jewish people , they insist , and somehow ` til date , the monument still stay . -rrb- sh : ... my mother and my brother pay in a lot of money , whatever they have to be able to get I out from concentration camp . but , they would not let I out because I still be in good condition , and ... they start to liquidate ghetto day by day ... 1943 , which mean , about six month after my father be kill , they kill ... they take out 1,000 Jews and this time they do not take they to Belzec , but they make they march through the city naked and outside the city ... the big ditch be already prepare and everybody go to such a board , and they get a bullet . whether he be alive , or not alive , it do not matter . and in one day , they kill that time over 1,000 ... my mother be that time kill ... so my brother be by himself , so he voluntarily come already to my camp .", "the one who do not survive , I do not get to see because they go straight in the-and we be in a big , big room . Mengele come in that room . we be naked . Stark naked . .", "Mengele come in that room . we be naked . Stark naked . . and he just parade around .", ". and he just parade around . back and forth -lrb- inaudible word -rrb- and he pass my side , you know , and you know , you be naked . you be not use to it . and I sort of try to hide myself a little bit or something .", "a : so we stay on -- only in we clothes , and in the morning they take we into the sauna . Q : Right . a : and we have to strip everything , and we -- and we jewel we have to put in a box . and there we be naked . so we possess only we naked body , nothing , nothing else .", "Q : Right . a : and we have to strip everything , and we -- and we jewel we have to put in a box . and there we be naked . so we possess only we naked body , nothing , nothing else . unbelievable , you know ?", "a : and we have to strip everything , and we -- and we jewel we have to put in a box . and there we be naked . so we possess only we naked body , nothing , nothing else . unbelievable , you know ? Q : yeah .", "Q : everywhere on you body that be hair -- that have hair . a : we be shave so we do not have even hair . so we be naked without hair , nothing , we be stand there . and then we go in the -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- in the next room , and there we -- be a big basin . and we go into the basin and a german woman , these kapo or so , which they come in yesterday from -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- .", "so she start to brush I , brush I , til bleeding . I be totally bleeding , cause I do not giver she this handkerchief . I do not want to give something what do not belong to I , what I save in my hand when I become naked . Q : so what be on this brush ? this be d-disinfectant of some kind , or soap --", "during the first lunch when I be there -- during lunch , as we eat , he say lie down all of you . we have to put the food down an-and to lie down in the mud . and then when -- after work , the girl -- not always , I be not there for a -- for a few day , but sometimes we have to undress and so he look through ours if we do not take something . he be so s -- crazy . do not like it .", "Q : No ? a : no . and fortunately , we do not ha -- sorry , we do not have to undr -- I do not remember that I have to undress . it be only to have straight shoe . Q : uh-huh .", "-lrb- what be you earliest memory from when you be little ? -rrb- my first memory be when I break my first tooth , which really hurt . you know those film strip like slide ? I like to watch those when I be little . -lrb- a viewer ? -rrb-", "a : no , not even shutter . they be more like we venetian blind , but they be on the outside and they be wooden , and you pull they up like that , but so , you can also turn they so that you can kind of peer out . I remember peer out , and that be a recollection I definitely have of carriage go by we window full of dead -- nude , dead body because they have collect they and then just strip they of clothes and be take they someplace . Q : be these horse draw ? a : horse-drawn .", "some be take to Dachau , the rest remain in Stuthof . we be order to leave asll we belongings except toothbrush and comb . the next room have table , we be tell to undress and laydown on the table , all woman be examine gynicologically to search for jewel , etc. . guar be around the room , they go through we hair . the second room be a showere room .", "nothing , just what we have , with 4 dollar , and there be a girl in we compartment on the train , I just want to tell you that because I remember that now , she name be Schecter , and she found a bakery store , in Vienna , and we be all three of we all alone , and we be travel , and suddenly she take out a big roll of money and she say to I do you have money too , and I say no , we take only what they allow we to , four dollar , and she say I take all the money from my father , from my mother , what they give we to survive , and when we get near the border , she take the money and , in Europe the train be different then they be here , each one have a radiator in the compartment , and she take the money and put it in the radiator , and she say as soon as we come out , as soon as we over the border , I take the money out , I hope you do not say anything . naturally not , we be happy we be alive . so when we come to the border , the ss come , that be the black uniform , the top notch , and they tell I , and they tell my wife , you come with we to a different compartment and get strip and to the other girl , I be not listen what they tell she . to I a nazi come and he strip because in my passport be Jew , that I be a jew , I be stand there , just like God make I , just with my stocking on , and I say to he , do you want I to take my stocking off , and he say , no it be not necessary , go ahead , go back . a woman take care of my wife and give she a thorough examination , and she come back after a few minute , but the girl be not in the compartment , so we be sit there , actually I be pray in that time , and then two ss man come in , again , I say to my wife , oh no !", "naturally not , we be happy we be alive . so when we come to the border , the ss come , that be the black uniform , the top notch , and they tell I , and they tell my wife , you come with we to a different compartment and get strip and to the other girl , I be not listen what they tell she . to I a nazi come and he strip because in my passport be Jew , that I be a jew , I be stand there , just like God make I , just with my stocking on , and I say to he , do you want I to take my stocking off , and he say , no it be not necessary , go ahead , go back . a woman take care of my wife and give she a thorough examination , and she come back after a few minute , but the girl be not in the compartment , so we be sit there , actually I be pray in that time , and then two ss man come in , again , I say to my wife , oh no ! and he say to I , do you put money behind the radiator ?", "would not ! Q : not . a : because it be not ... if we have know that we be go to be strip bare before we even hit the train ... it be blissful ignorance . until the end of the war we do not know , until see the news of the liberation of the camp , we do not know about the extent . we do not see those cadaver pile on top of each other , not until ' 45 .", "and I be tell two version , I be not -- I be not sure which be right . one that the -- the farmer who agree with my mother to hide my sister -- one person , my sister , that he denounce she because he want the violin . and the other one be that she be denounce by someone else and she be parade naked through the main street and then they murder she . I do not know which be the right story , but that be what I be tell by my neighbor when we come back to learn the fate of the rest of we family , and -- Q : so you find that out --", "we really need a disinfection . and the way it be give to we be rather primitively . I remember we have to undress , and it du -- do not matter if there be man , woman . it be one corner there with maybe a sheet hanging in between . you have to strip completely and then they put a hose on you .", "I remember we have to undress , and it du -- do not matter if there be man , woman . it be one corner there with maybe a sheet hanging in between . you have to strip completely and then they put a hose on you . and the hose have white -- it look like white powder . and that powder , I can still smell it .", "and I certainly know that time be rough ; I know that something be happen in Germany . but I also know that there be a famine in China , you know , so - because there be a famine in China in the 30s , I think - so that I know that there be famine in China and I know there be something go on in Germany , but how that related to my personal life or to we , it be sort of far-fetched . I do begin , during the economic time , I do begin to feel certain pressure , and I do begin to feel certain anti-semitic , well , direct anti-semitic reference to who we be , but that be not on any scale - because as a child , you know , a child can call you a jew and he can call you baldy and he can call you any kind rotten name , and if you can rationalize to yourself within that context , you know how kid fight , and ... so , I be aware of a certain change in atmosphere in Poland because I do know now from study history that there be a wave of anti-semitism that be extremely , to the naked eye , it be easy to see , because , you know , when I translate - I be work on Korchuk -lrb- ph -rrb- a lot , Korchuk 's writing , and I translate he work - I realize that he only , the only reason for he be remove from the position of the good doctor , who read poetry and talk about child upbringe on the radio in the 30s , that he be remove from that position only because of anti- Semitism . he be a very progressive educator , as you know , and a very enlighten man and he be a jew , of course , by birth , but he be very polish in he upbringing and outlook , not christian , but Polish , and he bring all these new idea to Poland , because he study in England , you know , and he bring the new idea , the new approach to child upbringing , because he also write story for child , you know . he write book about child and book for child .", "tape # 3 Q : I think the tape stop before you explain how the plane be swoop down with light underneath they and shooting at you . a : yes , at the group catch in the valley - townspeople and the peasant from the surround area - and of course that be real , true , naked warfare , that be what that be , because eventually , I hate to say that , but I do know that there be bayonet warfare go on , and that be my first real true awakening to what be happen . Q : you must have be scare to death . a : scare to ... that be a night of total fear .", "because , you know , they have olive drab uniform , green , type of green . and , of course , in the panic , I mean , everything , so I - the thing move , the tree could move . well , I look up and there be the soldier , but that be more as a , you know , I think I probably feel good about it because he be go to protect I , you know , whereas everything else be naked fear . and subsequently when we go home - this be also very important , I think I have already mention it - the town be not bomb , absolutely not bomb , and that be , with I be sure by design . so that eventually when everybody get settle back and it be now official that the german have occupy Poland , the factory be take over and convert to heavy war machinery and , whereas before the war , Jews be not employ in that plant , now Jews be begin to be take in as a labor force .", "in fact , I be really , truly - I be not a independent thinker in any such way that you could imagine I , plan or ... I probably understand what be go on very well . I understand it very well , because horror be not very hard to understand . it be naked horror in front of you eye , so you know what be happen . but how that related to the overall thing , I know I be petrified . I live in fear every second of my life .", "Q : but you be in Birkenau , you be in Auschwitz two , right ? a : yes . I -- I really do not know at that time that it be Birkenau , but in the morning we use to stand at the barb wire , and we use to see naked man , and real musselman go by , and wave and seek -- be -- be scr-screaming across the wire if they know of this and this person , either they wife , they mother , or whatever . Q : they be on the outside , ask -- a : they be -- yes , they be in the man 's -- in the man 's camp .", "yes , we be prepare to fight to end , hopefully they end . 19:06 -lrb- Q : for we you be the hero . what do it mean to you to see we in strip shirt , etc -rrb- -lrb- dd -rrb- that question do not arise at that time . the feeling be that we be find the reminisce of the lose jewelry . -lrb- Q : when you come to the db campus you be involve in education .", "leave no impression that I do not have or do have . I wa -- I be take care of because I be dress . I be not walk around naked , or no -- barefoot . and again , Malka Weinmann may well have supervise that part for I too . so , in broad sense , my need be take care of .", "Q : outside of the gate ? a : no , inside , cause we be inside the -- the wall come around and then the -- the -- the big gate be in here on the -- on the block house . and some have strip uniform on , some have just a blanket on they . Stark naked . some have the blanket wrap around they head so you would not know who they be .", "a : no , inside , cause we be inside the -- the wall come around and then the -- the -- the big gate be in here on the -- on the block house . and some have strip uniform on , some have just a blanket on they . Stark naked . some have the blanket wrap around they head so you would not know who they be . they be afraid of be recognize , that be how -- and , you know , `` what ?", "how degrading , when you think of it . but that be how we have to go on . the first couple of day that we work at the camp , we feel so bad , so dirty , so contaminate , that we would come back to we nurse quarter and literally strip , outside the door and just drop we drawer right there and these nice german girl would grab they and wash they for we , cause we do not want to go in the house with this aroma around we . you know , and -- and that odor cling to you -- you clothes after awhile , too . so -- and after awhile you do not notice it .", "and some of they be dead , with these thing still run , you know and so anybody that look like they be half alive , you would ask they if they have diarrhea . if they do , you give they a handful of pill to swallow with a glass of water , if they could get it down and how many other in that same tier and then you go on to the next one , you know . and they be just naked on -- on these thing and of course naive little nurse , you know , I -- we would have hospital nursing , but to see all these naked man and you know and all bone , could not speak , some of they . of course , none of they could speak English . and -- real sad , real sad .", "there be a -- a non-aggression agreement , France and England on this side of Germany , Czechoslovakia on this side , should any -- should one be attack , the other would assist . and at that time , Chamberlain and Daladier decide -- I do not know whether decide , they think if they give in this little bit to Hitler , they avoid World War II . so not only be , in September ' 38 , this border area occupy by the Nazis , they also come beyond the Czech fortification which they have on the border , against the Germans , so now they be stand there naked , without any fa -- without any safety , security or fortification . so it be anticipate that Hitler 's appetite will grow to the point where he will occupy also the Czech land . and the parent of jewish teenager encourage they kid to learn a trade , should immigration become necessary , they can support themselves with work of they hand in a country whose language they do not know .", "hot water , nice showering , after three day in fil -- filth . there be no food the three day , and we still be not eat before the shower . and from there , not come back to the peg , but another door , they chase we out , naked and wet from a hot shower in the cold , wintry night , to another barrack , and then we be march along a counter , behind which some prisoner be sit and throw at we a pair of pants , a jacket , and a pair of boot . and the hat to take off -- not a hat , a cap to take off when you meet a ss man , it be for no other reason there . and those -- that clothing be without regard to we size .", "so you do not -- we do not -- be not allow to have a telephone . all my life I -- we have a telephone , my father have , and we be not allow to have it afterward . so they would strip we of everything , and every time we think it be the last thing . and another thing what the Germans do which be cruel , every jewish holiday , some law come up against the Jews . so when jewish holiday like Rosh Hashanah be approach , we be think , what will come this time ?", "my father have he sword , cause he be in the austrian army , and have a revolver -- have a -- a handgun at home . so he have to give that up , that be the very first thing . so they strip you slowly of all you right , and before you know it , you be like a slave , you have no rights at all . and you -- if you do not step -- when the ss man walk on the pavement , when -- we have to step down into the gutter , whatever . we be not allow to be in the pavement when the ss walk by .", "what happen , they catch -- there be people who be transport ash out of the town from the kitchen , and from where they be heat in big -- I do not know , they be ash . and un -- they -- they be stop by some ss , and they find some lettuce . these people be imprison , and everybody who be on the field be -- have to stop work , and they hoard we into one of the barracks , into one of those -- there be -- in the -- in the bastion or whatever that be , there be room , and there we have to -- they take four and four wim -- girl in , and they have to strip totally , and the ss -- and we be stage -- stand naked in front of the ss , and th -- he check whether you do not have anything . and then you dress , and we do not know what they will do with we , but they do let we go . this take a whole day till everybody be frisk , till three or four , and we go home .", "but while we there -- we be there , we do not . but that be the only time I be frisk like that . and because the gendarme be there , and of course they know we , they be watch with we , we have to strip to be naked , we call it fashion show . and we always say , `` oh , that one be in the -- at the fashion show . '' because he be with we , so -- that be one time , but we still -- I do not think we be afraid that something will happen to we , because we do not have anything , whatever we have , we eat .", "my friend 's mother that pass because she be with she , she say that she be 40 year old . she be the same age , 50 about , and that she be my friend 's sister . and because she be naked then -- and she say she have so many child , that be why she -- she lose a lot of weight , and she survive . Q : this be mama dittel ? a : mama dittel .", "but we have to do it always together , and we have to find they . so we have a candle . and in summer it be hot , we sleep naked . so we would light the candle and look for it , and Edgar say they have a good show downstairs , the boy do , who be work . we do not care .", "the Germans have different place to work . the ss handle carpentry and electricity . they use to have they jew go to the home of deportee and completely strip the place and send the item home to Germany . my parent be live -- you have to live where you work -- in a tailor shop where they repair uniform 25 . be there medical care ?", "they give we clothes like soldier wear , ill fitting and out of season . they take we shoe and give we wooden shoe . after the shower , naked , we be tattoo . the number be my name . we be give bowl for we watery black soup .", "the girl go with I to Bergen Belsen . I be in Ravensbruck a few month . we stand with we foot apart , naked while man shave we public hair -lrb- for lice -rrb- . in Bergen Belsen I clean office for the Germans . they would throw a piece of bread to we like to a dog .", "I be all wet and I wash myself . around the barrack there be wall with water pipe . it be the middle of winter but I undress and give myself a douche . I go to barrack with wet clothes but many time that night I have to wash again . I be sure I be go to die .", "and two american pilot be dead in concentration -- we concentration camp . besides this , be also kill in -- really hang , two very famous german officer . one be General Canares , very famous person in Germany , and because be against the Hitler , be two day before we liberation , two , three day before we liberation , be strip from the clothes and hang naked in concentration camp . that be be General Canares . also second very famous man be the leader of the sh -- leader , church leader from the Ausberg , I think so .", "that be be General Canares . also second very famous man be the leader of the sh -- leader , church leader from the Ausberg , I think so . this be Protestant , Protestant leader , and be also against the Hitler and be hang naked on the -- in the -- in this camp . that be be many other , and after the American , I not mention this , ne -- we be very please see the American , and American be so special , american young people , boy , be cry see the situation like we live in , we -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- , we hospital . and ask we people if -- I mean , the people who be go int -- in camp , if you have something and you suppose to do right or kill fellow who do something wrong for you , you can have the rifle , you can kill .", "a : yeah , but they be take away from I . Q : uh-huh . a : I mean , you have to strip -- Q : Right . a : I get these wooden shoe with a canvas top there .", "and when you lose a lot of weight you get to be careful because they get those selection in the camp . they would call a -- they would close the camp up completely , nobody can go in to work , and out of -- out to work or anything . and then you have to undress in front of the -- the shower room there , which be in essence a barrack with two door on each end , you know ? and you have -- you know what -- what this be all about , because we know they make the selection , we never -- once you in the camp you know all about it . so we have to undress completely n -- completely naked , and you have you shoe in you hand , that be all .", "and then you have to undress in front of the -- the shower room there , which be in essence a barrack with two door on each end , you know ? and you have -- you know what -- what this be all about , because we know they make the selection , we never -- once you in the camp you know all about it . so we have to undress completely n -- completely naked , and you have you shoe in you hand , that be all . they march you through that -- you have to run though that thing , and there be the ss standing , one guy have the cane , and he have the t -- the end that -- the handle end out , and if he see somebody that he think be not able to work any more , he would pull he by the neck over to the side , take he number , and he have to stand there . and you walk through it , you know , it -- it be like a russian Roulette so to speak , in -- in a different fashion .", "and they say to I , `` Sit here . '' and then the leader of the group , he have a higher rank , he be stand here , kind of face the other five , and the other five be in a horseshoe , five face I . and I think this be the end of my life , because now I go to prison , and I know you have to undress , and then when my blouse , I have button , you know , I think , when they find that -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- Q : you have all the papers -- a : I have all the papers from the robbery there .", "and then -- but you know , I be bring in , I be sit there , and I be pray there be -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- for those , and there be 500 guilder because by -- it be towards the end , and many jewish people do not have money any more . and in the city we have to pay the people something that they could buy the food , you know , and the jewish people be so eager also , collect money from people who do not dare to do dangerous thing , but be willing to contribute , so it be a busy time . and then they -- I -- I be pray to God , I think , oh , this be the end of my life , when I go to prison I have to undress , and they find that , and I will be shoot -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- . and I think of my wedding dress hang at home , and the -- all the expectation we have . and I be pray to God , and plead .", "and there we stand . and they have be so cruel with many thing . they once say to I that I could take a shower in Scheveningen , and then I be there , and I have not have any water -- I mean , that little pail with cold water , and when I stand there , and I would undress , and I want to -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- ready , I would never -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- . so they do all cruel thing to make you happy for something , and they would -- so we be afraid that the gate would open again and say , `` okay , all a big mistake , back in . '' and we want to get away , but we be so -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- nervous .", "Q : Interesting . and then I have something else that you should explain to everybody , because before you leave -- explain what this be , please . a : now , I have to do the laundry , because that be in -- but all the other woman have to do something , and like I say , there be nothing any more in the Netherlands , so all those other woman have to sit on long table , that be also the table where we have to eat , and on bench , and they have a rusty cup for themself , and it be water in it , and they get long strip of brown paper , and you know , when you go shopping , for food shopping , then you get those big brown bag , that type of paper . and they get long strip , and they have to dump that in the water in strip , and then wind it . and they have every day to do 60 meter -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- little bit , I think 70 yard or so .", "and then I have something else that you should explain to everybody , because before you leave -- explain what this be , please . a : now , I have to do the laundry , because that be in -- but all the other woman have to do something , and like I say , there be nothing any more in the Netherlands , so all those other woman have to sit on long table , that be also the table where we have to eat , and on bench , and they have a rusty cup for themself , and it be water in it , and they get long strip of brown paper , and you know , when you go shopping , for food shopping , then you get those big brown bag , that type of paper . and they get long strip , and they have to dump that in the water in strip , and then wind it . and they have every day to do 60 meter -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- little bit , I think 70 yard or so . and that be then dry , and when it be dry it be roll in roll , and they sell it as twine .", "a : in 1989 , when -- Q : when you go back ? a : this time difficult to say because I be very short time over there , and I be a little bit scare , beca -- I tell you , because still there practically be not the -- practically be not the communist any more , but still -- still be not the -- I do not feel it too -- too good because additional , I be strip from the polish citizenship , first of all . I do not have a polish citiz -- I be stri-stri-stripped for the citizenship . and in my american passport they tell that the United States will not -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- about I in the country when I be bear .", "Q : of the United States ? a : of United States . you say do not feel -- for I it be a difficult -- I tell you , if there be somebody tha -- strip you from the citizenship , you know , practically change everything . they talk that I can still put application for the -- to get back th -- my polish citizenship , but in this moment I tell myself , I be not interesting , my wife pass away , cemetery be here . when I go , I n -- maybe I go to visit , you know , for -- for a couple of day , go to the Poland to visit my friend , maybe to go to some , you know , -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- for a few day , because in Poland you -- very nice place , which I know when I be young boy , and nothing else .", "when I go , I n -- maybe I go to visit , you know , for -- for a couple of day , go to the Poland to visit my friend , maybe to go to some , you know , -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- for a few day , because in Poland you -- very nice place , which I know when I be young boy , and nothing else . I be not feel that I would like to move any place . Q : yeah , but when do -- when be you strip of you citizenship ? a : in 19 -- because when I get the passport for three we -- for three month , they let the -- they ask I to -- they have to come back for Poland because my passport expire . they send I the letter if I be not back to the Poland th-they give I -- they would like to give I the passport one way , let I go from the Poland -- from United States to the Poland and then in the Poland I have to put application for the emigration .", "so the Slovak , two division go into Russia , advance all the way to the caucasian mountain . Q : but it be -- it be that -- well , really my question be , you life would change dramatically when you be 10 , be I right ? a : yes , yeah , life change dramatically because the Aryan law be put into effect by the slovak legislature , follow the script , the german script , and that mean Jews be strip , in a very methodical way of all property , all privilege . and it be a bureaucratically highly organize process of take property away . the -- it be very important that the various people who owe they loyalty to the Nazis and to the Slovak , be get as much property as possible .", "and it be a bureaucratically highly organize process of take property away . the -- it be very important that the various people who owe they loyalty to the Nazis and to the Slovak , be get as much property as possible . so it start as a way of strip the Jews of property , ship most of the Jews , like 85 percent of the Jews into annihilation camp , and then whoever be leave , deprive they of all the civil rights and -- and property and radio and fur coat and -- and automobile , and -- and -- you know , th-there be a long list , I still have those list of what you can or can not do , and what street you can be on , what be you curfew , whether you can have a window look at the street , or not look at the street . I mean it be a very elaborate , bureaucratic structure that get erect to do this . and , you know , as time go on , you know , thing get close down .", "he could not -- I could not si -- you know . I cry when he -- when the steak come on my plate , I say , oh this be a ration for a whole family for a month , I can not eat that . and then in the evening he take I to Folies Berg\u00e8re where I see for the first time a naked woman , which you know , in -- in those day , you know , ma -- ma -- that be very puritanical . and then I come to England and I go to school in England , get my English fix up , and I be in England from February 1948 until early in October 1948 when a Liberty ship w-was return empty from Plymouth to New York . and I get , for 83.50 , a fare on a empty -- in the hold of a Liberty ship .", "in other word , endemic in the structure of modern civilization , of industrialization , be a capability of massive destruction , by mean out of anatomic weapon . Sybil Milton be very , very much take by it . I then subsequently provide to the Holocaust Museum , a collection of document which I assemble , my sister actually help with it , which show methodically how the various law be use in Slovakia to gradually strip a innkeeper , who be a veteran from World War I , and who receive special license to be a innkeeper and how that be take away , and this be take away and the fur coat be take , and radio be take , and so on , until you finally get rid of the innkeeper altogether and then gas he . and I give a collection of something like 30 document , where the wife actually get a receipt for the husband . in other word , the bureaucracy work with perfection and completeness and everything be legitimate and everything be sign and everything be cover by law .", "a : -- and -- and he be -- I do not know wa -- no , he be not shoot , I do not know what happen to tho -- you know they -- this be -- this be so cunningly devise , because they know that the young people would not go to look for apartment , they have to go to work . so they know the older people would go , so they leave -- they close all the entrance , wherever they be , and that -- and leave that Peltewna Street entrance , and they catch everybody one by one . and later on the rumor be that -- that they shoot they , that they -- the rumor be that they see naked people on the truck , and there be a bad day , I -- I do not know what it be -- it be -- I think it be cold -- cold day , it wa -- it -- it could have be either in the fall -- in November something , November ' 41 , maybe , or spring ' 42 . probably November ' 41 . and -- and so it be very cold , and -- and then they say they gas they with the carbon monoxide in the truck , or they take they somewhere where they shoot they on the hill .", "Q : and be it very hot ? a : it be extremely hot , and we -- we -- when we arrive by train in Baushowiczy , which be Bauschowitz , because there be no train station , no rail to Terez\u00edn , they be only build later for the sole purpose of transport jew from Terez\u00edn to the east . but we arrive in Bauschowitz , and there be truck there with Czechs who have be in Terez\u00edn since ' 41 , and some of they have strip uniform on , which also be not continue , you know , after more and more transport arrive , they do not give uniform to inmate any more . and they have to -- they work for the Nazis to -- to take all the luggage out of the luggage car , and put they on truck . and of course , they be then transport back to Germany .", "and that be something I will never erase out of my mind . and I think this be when I decide , not consciously , to just not even see what be go on around I . and then we be , as you know , we be put into a s -- bring into a sauna and strip of everything . we hair be shear , we body hair be shear and w-we be scream at . I never forget that sauna for the rest of my life .", "I never forget that sauna for the rest of my life . it be a very large room , it be a brick building , and there be ss line -- male ss line on both side of the wall , make dirty joke . you know , we be all naked while we be be shave . and that be too much for anybody to even think reasonably . I mean --", "now that be -- that wa -- make a terrible impression on I . and then shortly after that , we have a selektion for work . and it be a fairly large table outside , and it be pretty cold , and we have to all strip naked again , and walk in front of this table . and there be a man , a representative from industry at one end , and two ss officer at that table . and he select very few people .", "and there be a man , a representative from industry at one end , and two ss officer at that table . and he select very few people . and we be kind of standing in line , naked . and when I get to this man from industry , he ask I to show he my hand , which I do . I -- I do not have a very small , fancy hand .", "and we be then push into the road again , and you know , we have -- we could put a -- we only have a dress anyway , put we dress on , be push into the road . and we be put into a s -- we be in front of another sauna , a bath house , and by that time , I believe that people be be gas , because we could smell the burning flesh , really . and when the ss guard tell we that we have to strip naked before we even get into the shower house , the sauna , I really think that be it , because I also have learn that people be gas in a sauna , that the gas come through the shower head . so it be welcome when we feel the ice cold water drip on we skin . and we again just get a shift , and no underwear , no sock .", "PS : ... of Naz - ... pb : Cut all they woman 's hair off . now , the French would get a hold of the woman as we would capture they , and they would take they and undress they and cut all they hair off . PS : do you see any ... pb : and put they in the street .", "PS : yeah . pb : ... this brown camera . you see they with you naked eye . PS : yeah . pb : these picture here .", "pb : I can not recall . but we do go to another camp , and they be a little , have a little more fat on they . and we have to strip they down bare . but we have a line where we could not go across , and we be all stand there with the -lsb- chuckle -rsb- little pencil stickin ' out we pants . and we be throwin ' 'em over chocolate bar and orange and thing .", "do not show you be sick , '' but we have a under , next , next bed under I , next bed under there be a little room here . there be a woman , a french woman , a christian woman , but she husband be jewish and she give birth there , a little girl . the jewish doctor help she to give birth , but when I arrive the baby be already bear , and the baby have no clothing , nothing , and I know how to sew and the mother give some piece of thing , and I make the hat and I make , you know the little hat , and I make the little shirt for she , she be naked , the baby be naked . just cover with the blanket and the baby be cry , there be so much bed bug , you can not sleep at night . you put down you head , you put down you head , you bed bug , you can , you can , eat you up .", "somehow we get a bottle of vodka , and we wave the vodka in front of a trunk , and the guy stop . my mother , my sister , Gert , my wife , and I and two friend , we go on this truck and he take we to go south . and all of a sudden , in the middle of the wood , he stop , ask we to go down to the wood , undress completely . he take all we miserable rag , include the shoe and leave with the russian truck . so we come south to a town soroca -lsb- also spell Soroki -rsb- , which be on the Dniester River , and we come to the Dniester River .", "dg : ok , of the year , so I be 12 year old . and then everything be come along okay until one day suddenly the german show up , under the clear blue sky . and what they do be they gather all the boy -- it be a very simple thing for they to do -- and they make everybody undress . and everybody that be jewish be circumcise . EM : and the belgian usually do not circumcise ?", "I hear Hitler speak on the radio . this devil have such a power and almost mesmerize he mass when he speak . and I hear he say , `` Mr. Rosenfeld , '' this be how he pronounce President Roosevelt , `` you can have you Jews , I will let they go naked . you can have they . '' I hear Hitler 's voice , and he be the most powerful speaker .", "it will come in handy . '' to describe Auschwitz , there be no word in the human language to describe that hell , because in comparison probably with the real hell , this would have be -- the real hell in heaven might have be a paradise in comparison with Auschwitz . you be immediately surround by people who drag you , shave you head , take everything away from you , undress you , take out from under you tongue a little golden heart which you have as a memento ; and then give you clothes which be transparent , do not fit . and then come the selection , and you go on a long road , and you come across a very handsome man with penetrate deep eye .2 I shall never forget he face . I come across he with my mother under my arm , and he look at I and point to the left , take my mother away from I and point she to the right , and say to I , `` you be too beautiful and young .", "we find some needle and thread in the factory , we -- you know , we put it together . I be lucky that one of the ss woman in the factory take a liking to I because of my german and she bring I a pair of stocking . but how can you wear stocking if everybody else be naked ! it be not a pleasant thing to do . jf : be you aware of any religious service go on while you be in the camp ?", "and the doctor , all kind of booth be there . one give out underwear , one give out a dress and a raincoat and a suitcase . and , but we go , and we be still naked , we go to a bath . they give we a bath that I will not forget this all my life . the first time I be clean in so many year .", "I have very little opportunity to look down below . we be concern mainly with fighter . I as the radio operator , discharge chaff , which be a metalized strip that combate ack-ack , they camera and they instrument to pick we up . but other than that I have no knowledge whatsoever of anything like that . PS : you action on the b-17 bomber , be it , you be navigator ?", "mr : in 1933 , Mussolini be against Hitler . in fact , when the Jews in Palestine organize a fair in Bari , which be in south Italy , he want to go into that pavilion and say , he say at that occasion : `` where be the Germans when these Jews have a great civilization , a culture . they still be half naked roaming in the wood . '' this be I believe in 1934 . why ?", "hs : and the report say that they hear scream for help from a woman inside the burning window . she be aflame . they find she later on the pavement , naked with clothes burn , a shrivel , black corpse . the policemen later , this report say , write down , batch of seven . they say that about 40,000 people lose they life on that one day but there be no exact number possible because so many old people , especially they sit in they basement and do not want to leave even when they be nudge by other .", "and , of course , we have . we go to the airport . each of we be put in a separate cubicle ; we have to strip , and every fold of we body be examine for hidden jewel , money , I do not know what . they do not find anything . they even take my little brother 's teddy bear , which he have cling to for the four year of he life .", "and then -- and then my brother and I , and my father , they take we into barracks . and they say -- we be undressed , and we di -- we still do not know what be g -- what be -- what be go to happen to we . and they -- they say everybody 's undress , and then we leave the clothes there , they take the clothes away . and then they bring we those haftle clothes , you know , those striped clothes , you have see the -- the -- the concentration camp . so then we know we be -- we be save , you know , that we be go to go to work camp .", "i-it be only one -- or it be only one day out of a year , and there be -- we be there only one year . no , we do not have no -- no interest in religion because we lose it all . I remember when we come in Auschwitz , you know , and they be undress we , and all the people start to scream , where be God , where be God , you know ? you know , so we -- we sort -- a lot of people lose it . that be it .", "Q : I see , right . a : I -- I pop up and they d -- they -- and then something happen which -- of which I be hav -- half -- you know , I be half conscious . and they pull all the clothes from I , stark naked and -- and -- and wrap I into army blanket and put I on a stretcher there , or a bunk bed or whatever it be . and I be -- I be in a very elated mood , you know ? and captain -- no , it be not a captain -- he sit next to I and after about four hour I go into shock .", "Q : No . okay . a : so this endless processing , be strip naked , be shear , disinfect , sit , wait , sit naked on the floor . eventually rush , always rush from barrack to barrack , tha -- at -- at -- at double time with guard bark and hit . throw some mis -- ill -- ill-fitting prison uniform and break down shoe , and march into the compound in a barrack across from the gypsy barracks , where there be about 10,000 -- abi -- about a thousand kid my age .", "a : so okay . so you know enough about Auschwitz , you know that camp c and d be largely warehouse of labor personnel . german civilian come in , selection be set up , usually in the -- naked , not always . they select the worker and those people be march out ta -- a -- first into compound a and then register , tattoo and send out . digression .", "and this man volunteer and I be push in . Piotr slip I a gold watch in my hand , he -- for the doctor . so we be strip , examine . have a jewish inmate doctor examine . I pass he the watch , he say , `` thank you , I would have pass you anyhow . ''", "Q : Right ? a : right . and there be -- I be naked and shiver , run from one barrack to the next with my bundle of clothes , and a guard stop I and he say , `` where be you go ? how old be you ? what be you birth date ? ''", "Q : Right . a : and everybody come -- Mickey Mouse , oh . and I be save those strip . Q : you like that ? right .", "Q : uh-huh , uh-huh . a : or we -- the train go to Birkenau and we be march to the -- to the shower . you know , to the place where we be greet , and the greet be , take off you clothes , stay naked , and around be woman , man , and the first thing that they be do be shave we . we head , all hair of we body . man do that .", "Q : Right . a : and the face , now the face , so we know that be the physician of Auschwitz , the famous one . and then we go , I and my sister be leave , and we be lead to this big hole where , you know , we sit naked and shave , and then lead to shower . and we know already that the shower mean death , so -- and that be sort of -- we all be look for -- you know , for death . as it happen , of course , the one that we be with do not get kill , we be really take shower , and give some so-called clothing , one shoe high heel , one shoe low heel , and s -- coup -- and a couple of sort of schmate , and lead to barracks , we be lead then to the barracks .", "well -- and those two start cry , do not do that , you will give we out , they will kill we because of you . needless to say I do not listen to that , and I stay under one bunk bed , and that be it . and of course , I hear then , you know , they go to the next room where my sister be , and the room get empty , and I could see through the window , there be a window , the truck be wait there , and they climb naked into the truck . hour pass , and it get dark , and two ss man come in the room with lantern and dog and start , you know , look . Ser -- search light under the bunk bed , and do not find we .", "he say , `` you can if you want to , but I be not guarantee that the train will not take off without you . '' so she wake I up . I do not have to strip , but my parent do . and the amount of money that my father be allow to take out , he have more on he than he be allow to , he telegraph that to he brother . -lsb- indecipherable -rsb-", "Q : and how be you wake up in the morning ? a : First of all the light be switch on , I think at six o'clock in the morning , and there be a lot of noise , people yell , get up , get up . Q : do you have strip uniform ? a : yes . Q : and that be what you wear all the time ?", "no , I mean , he be -- he -- as I say , he be very nice . and then he wife -- it be -- the place be so cold -- they do not heat the upstairs , the water freeze in the water picture . I would get undress under the cover , and then in the morning I would take all my clothes , put they under the cover , warm they up and get dress again . it be terribly cold there beca -- why ? because they do not heat they upstairs .", "a : well we pick up the goose , and it -- carry it in a -- a tapestry bag and apparently a dog pick up the scent and follow we until we get to the trolley . and get into the trolley , nobody notice that the dog be follow we . I get home , I have a navy coat on -- I wear , and I have a navy sweater , and when I undress , I be navy . the color -- I must have perspire so from fear , that -- th-the colo -- the color come off . Q : be this the kind of thing you be actually able to laugh about in the moment ?", "we be privileged prisoner there because we be the only , more or le -- that be mostly migrant worker , and I be -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- in quarantine , and the -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- be into a big room . Mariani and I sleep on the table because we be not about to sleep on the -- with they , because we be scare . and we would get up in the morning and we would go into the washroom and strip and wash , because one thing we know , we have to try to keep clean . those people all look at we because they do not know from that . anyway , eventually --", "he go right into -- into selection . and Mariani and I be in the block together for maybe four week or so , four or five week , and then I work that we -- I be send to work in -- they tor -- I still do not know what they do with it . you tor -- you tear the clothing into strip , braid they , and that be it . whatever they do with it , whatever they use it for , I never find out . and then I work -- I build a road to the east , we be transport rock and break the rock , and there we have a guard who would let we sit in the outhouse by the tower to take a re -- it be brutally hot , even in -- in September .", "and the worst thing which could happen to you , that be in Birkenau , be -- you know , you have a bucket for elimination , so there be a thing which , if you be the last one in the morning to use that , because if you use it the last one , it be you who carry it out . as I say , if you do not laugh , you cry . when I -- when we first go -- get there , you know , we undress , we go into the shower , they cut you hair . they tattoo you and they give you clothes . and you have to remember we come from -- that we want to say normal life .", "it be -- th-the -- the sudden transformation , that be the -- the thing . Q : when do you receive the tattoo ? a : right at entry , you know , right when we be in the -- we undress , I think -- we undress , we hair be cut , go into the sauna , or even -- and I think we might even have get the to -- tattoo right away , cause wi -- go very fast . Q : do you remember you number ? a : yeah .", "a : yeah , yeah . I mean , the last selection I go through be with Mariani and I be -- I have a rash , and this be a total no-no . and so Mariani say -- we be fall back , so by the time -- you know , you do anything and everything , and I keep my clothes here -- I mean , you be naked , but you have you possession . so I go and I -- so I should be -- with the whole thing , you know , a -- apparently they have enough , and here I be , and they give I -- I show they my number and he give I a push like I almost no -- fall , you know , but they have enough . you know , he do not want I any more , and neither they do not -- and not Mariani either , so -- she be in back of I .", "a door at one each -- a door at each end . and we have one bulb hanging from the ceiling in the middle , which go on for one hour at night , if it be a lot , okay ? and so we -- at night we strip to look for lice -- you know , lice ? and try to kill whatever you could find in you clothing . so I see he strip one day , and whatever he stomach be , be now a big flap hang there .", "and so we -- at night we strip to look for lice -- you know , lice ? and try to kill whatever you could find in you clothing . so I see he strip one day , and whatever he stomach be , be now a big flap hang there . so I know the situation well -- too good . and then it get to be winter .", "and we have the cemetery at the end of the camp , be -- the camp be maybe a mile long . at the em -- end of the camp be a cemetery and they use to bury they there . and it be a situation -- I be tell you , if -- if we have no -- no light at all in the barracks , nothing , one bulb hanging in the middle , maybe one hour at night , I be tell you that be all , and that be where we quickly strip , whether winter or summer , do not matter , and look for the lice , and -lsb- sound effect -rsb- Q : mm-hm . where do you eat ?", "a : -- it be the truth , I remember that . and -- Q : so he sew these strip of paper together so -- a : yeah , this -- the white strip from the newspaper . Q : -- so that you would have a whole --", "and -- Q : so he sew these strip of paper together so -- a : yeah , this -- the white strip from the newspaper . Q : -- so that you would have a whole -- a : yeah , that I could write , you know ?", "it be a place near Czestochowa , around Czestochowa . Q : and -- and it be name because there be a river there ? a : at the Warta , yeah , the -- that -- the Warta river , it be a very narrow str -- strip of the river go by there , that be call Wartawerk . Q : and be there other camp nearby ? a : yes , there be two other camp , Wartawerk and Hazak .", "we have to eat it one way or the other . one day a week , usually every Friday , we use to go to the shower to be clean and to have we -- we cl-clothing be disinfect . we go to the shower , we take we clothing , man and woman together in the same place , naked . we have about five minute of shower , and 75 minute naked wait for we -- we -- we clothing to come back from the -- I do not know how they use to call , the place where they disinfect they , and then take he back to the camp . Q : and besides friday , what else do you remember about the daily routine ?", "one day a week , usually every Friday , we use to go to the shower to be clean and to have we -- we cl-clothing be disinfect . we go to the shower , we take we clothing , man and woman together in the same place , naked . we have about five minute of shower , and 75 minute naked wait for we -- we -- we clothing to come back from the -- I do not know how they use to call , the place where they disinfect they , and then take he back to the camp . Q : and besides friday , what else do you remember about the daily routine ? a : what I remember , twice a day we use to have what they call the appel , or the appelle .", "they should go from this side , they should go from this side . and -- and this be ho-how , then it be th-the dinner and then we do -- do something , play , and then we have to -- time for cleaning ourself from the lice . every di-di-di -- at five o'clock , I think , my mother be take we di-di -- undress we and kill those lice , and put -- lice , and put the dress up . this be another function . Q : how do she do it ?", "and it be very easy for the german to look at the birth certificate and see , because that be there . the only people who escape that be people in large city where they -- it be easy for they to move , you know , they just do not stay with the -- but a little town like mine , everybody know who be jewish and those who do not rat on each other and -- but it be all record in the -- in the city hall of who be jewish and who be not . and in large city the other thing they do be that they make the man undress cause every jew be circumcise and there be no christian that be circumcise for health reason at that time . so if people be in doubt , or if they feel the soldier that they be -- somebody be escape , they would make they get undressed . Q : when the political situation change , how much of that do you understand ?", "but there be some effort to keep I go as a communication person because if I be , the earlier that I get kill , the quicker that they lose my skill in communication . so I kind of do what I have to do to stay protect so I could maintain my communication , but also to fire when I have to , to kill the enemy . Int : do you have to run strip of wire between the various command post ? be that part of you job ? MW : I stretch wire between cp and between gun position .", "it be quite cold , and I remember , within minute , door open and people run out with dish and knife , and they start skin this horse . as they pull off the skin , I remember it be steam . within minute , that horse be pretty much strip . even the bone be take for soup . there be nothing left of that horse .", "they be make a example of . this be like early spring . it be cold , and they strip they naked and beat they half to death , and put each of they in a dog cage , in the big area where -- the appelplatz , where people would have to line up every morning to be count -- as a example . it take he two day and a night to die . one of the reason I speak be because I do not want anybody else 's father or , as a matter of fact , I do not want anybody else to die like that , because the cruelty to these people be unimaginable .", "it take he two day and a night to die . one of the reason I speak be because I do not want anybody else 's father or , as a matter of fact , I do not want anybody else to die like that , because the cruelty to these people be unimaginable . it be one thing if you just kill somebody , but to reduce human being to nothing , to take away they dignity to this extent , to have a man shiver , naked , half dead in a dog cage , die slowly , be wrong . you know , I have no grave . I have nowhere to go and connect with my father at all .", "my only interest in those papers be the Sunday funny , and the daily funny as well . my brother Harry and I be crazy about the cartoon , because we be bo-both have art talent . and part of the art talent we have come from copy the cartoon from the newspaper strip , which be teach to we by we father . Q : really ? a : oh yes .", "but we make we ice skate . Q : you make you own ice skate ? a : we make we own ice skate because all it take be le-leather strap , a piece of wood , and then you go to the local blacksmith and he put a little strip of iron underneath as -- as a runner . and you put the strap -- nail the strap to the piece of wood , and you put it on you foot . it work .", "and we use to have a pharmacy there , you know , like for -- for six people there , where somebody be very sick they -- they treat he . so there come two german doctor . they lane -- line up all the -- naked . we ki -- we -- we face they naked . and one doctor be make right , and one to the left .", "so there come two german doctor . they lane -- line up all the -- naked . we ki -- we -- we face they naked . and one doctor be make right , and one to the left . it be alphabetical order .", "a : he be move very fast , and we be terribly important in the fact that he be able to move so fast because a c-47 carry paratrooper into area of drop . then , on the way back , they -- they come back and pick up the glider and they throw it -- fly they in . then they come back and they fly into -- like I take a mission into -- on D-Day plus six , we fly into Omaha Beach , and we fly into a -- a -- a landing strip that have be cut hastily in the bluff above Omaha Beach . and we land there with flight nurse aboard , and pick up the terribly wound -- most terribly wound of Omaha Beach , and we just have a constant stream of airplane fly in and out , and bring those people back to hospital in England . and while I be there , I step out of the airplane , try to help with the loading of the -- of the litter patient and so forth .", "at the same time he would have a fl -- a plane fly and drop what they call window . Q : and what be that ? a : window be strip of tin foil . and it -- the strip of tinfoil would look , on the german radar , like a whole big fleet of airplane come . and they be all head for this -- this fake landing site he design .", "Q : and what be that ? a : window be strip of tin foil . and it -- the strip of tinfoil would look , on the german radar , like a whole big fleet of airplane come . and they be all head for this -- this fake landing site he design . he also design rubber paratrooper of different size , make it look like there be a lot of they .", "and since we get in there some of the prisoner come up and pretty soon they start tell -- and in English , a few of they speak English , and -- or it be relay through some of the guy that -- we have one guy in we group that speak -- Ben Sharf -lrb- ph -rrb- be a ger -- speak german real well . and so he say , we be in Buchenwald concentration camp . and then they take we in and strip all of we clothes off of we and put we in a shower-like thing , you know , and we come out , we do not know what be go on . and then they shave every hair off of we body and then swab we with something like creosote that set we on fire , you know , and you ben -- you be dance around , jump and si -- cause it be burn , ju-just like it be peel the skin off , you know . and then they bring we down a little fu-further and they start hand we some clothing .", "and they be bad place . and these prisoner be all -- well , they be Jews , gypsy , homosexual , whatever Germany do not want go into a concentration camp . and they strip we completely naked , shave every hair off we body , douse we with disinfectant , give we a shirt and a pair of pants -- be probably from somebody who die , they be civilian-type clothes -- we have no shoe , no sock , and we sleep outside , just on the ground for probably five or six day . and this be in October . it be get pretty cold .", "a : well , yes and no . I -- I be ef -- wh-what -- what really bother I be in -- in that one book that be very detailed , with all the name of german and officer and the happening from day to day , they describe how they be kill , you know . the trench be dig and they undress and -- and they get shot and -- and I very often , even nowadays , I -- I think , what go on in -- in my father 's mind at that moment ? do he feel it be all he fault , or he do -- he -- he miss out on do something to -- or do not he -- he do not push hard enough to get out earlier , or g-get different country , or send my si -- the sis -- my sister to Israel . or do he , in the last moment , think of I ?", "then my mother take whatever she cook , you know , for Shabbas , and they take we to the train . not know where we go , not know nothing . hungry and naked and everybody get up like they know how to do it , very rough . Q : so the manner be different from what you have ac -- be experience up til then ? the way the soldier behave be different than what you have experience in lw\u00f3w until that time .", "and they take we to concentration camp , small house , people in this dress . First put everybody to wash -- to shower , cold water of course , and everybody take from we whatever we have in we hand . naked , shower and later next room , big room , all bish -- very big place with old dress , probably from di -- from jewish people who be for -- dead , and they give to we . each dress be on the back , 1x , you know why ? Color , very all , very strong color , all -- should be -- if , for example , somebody can go to leave , it be impossible because everybody could know that be from concentration camp .", "but you know what be happen be what be overcrowd . Q : yeah . a : and someday the -- be -- they take we to big place , a round place , and each woman from uprising , you have to take all dress , naked . Q : this be in Ravensbr\u00fcck ? a : yeah , and in the middle be couple chair , in the -- which sit ss and couple man in dark suit , very elegant .", "men from IG Farben industry . they -- this industry be make anus -- ammunition . we do not know about it , but they say this way be -- now that be funny , but we do not know why -- why each one be shame to be naked . this old lady , young lady , child almost . yeah , I look like chi-child , 16 year old .", "the Germans then stick we in cattle truck , forty in a truck , and take I then I be in the truck for two day , no food , and we all have the run , just imagine how humiliating it be in those truck with no toilet nothing and we use one of the corner as a toilet . we go to , I think Stalag IVB at Moosburg , I think it be , and there they get we out they give we some food and by this time , do not forget , we be cover in lice . so they take all of we uniform and put it in whatever it do , clean they up and give it to we back whilst we be naked they take we through a place where they have like sheep shearer and they take all we hair off , everywhere , up , down below , up on the top , everywhere , and then they dab we with what I call be a bucket of creosote , and disinfectant anyway they put we back on the train now and we be on the train again for about another two day and eventually pull up in a station call Lansdorf , Poland . err , it be Stalag V111B -lsb- dl -rsb- and when , when do you arrive at Stalag VIIIB ?", "-lsb- bb -rsb- ... very unpleasant , and er would not talk to we , and er , and the only time , once when -- and this story be about in three different book , tell by three different people -lsb- mumble , laugh -rsb- , I get to know , very slightly , er , two french Jews , who come from , both of they lawyer , they come from Toulouse . one could speak just a little bit of English maybe understand , but it be difficult , and erm , I think the second , the second day i actually speak to they , he come in and he have , under he uniform , he jacket he have a , a old , torn jersey , and all this bit miss in the front of here , and I remember at the barracks , I have a piece of knit material about that size , and I think that would do then fine , it will fit nicely over there . I try to explain to he when I see he the next day , what it be for , and they be please to have it , and I say ` if you know anyone who can knit , you can strip it all down and knit it all up ' . but anyway , the follow morning , he brother come in on he own , and er , I ask he where he brother be , he say -- I do not know what he say but I find out afterwards -- he be tell I he be in a box about two foot square , about two foot high , and they have to spend the day in there . the Capo , he would put it through the Germans when they get back that they would get this bit of material , -lsb- MUMBLES -rsb- , and er , I think well I will see he the follow day when I come back , but unfortunately that day I would get move onto another job and I never see they again .", "and we come home , and we do not even know what -- what my parent find in Chernowitz . what they find be nothing . we -- we home be strip and we property be go , and the apartment be -- somebody else be live in it . and like you do not even want to start make demand . so -- but -- so what happen while we be go be -- be a story unto itself .", "a : -- of lice . and we have no -- they take we hair off -- oh , that be wonderful too , that be another wonderful experience . and there be another incident which be horrible when we be all sit naked around , and just to think about it make I shudder . and so that be -- what else would you like to know about that camp which be a horrible camp ? Q : be there ever a time there that you get sick ?", "the dutch people and a few of the other be be hold more as hostage for exchange purpose with the Americans for some of the german prisoner that we be hold . so they be in fairly good condition and clothing be fairly good , but for the most part , they clothes be very ragged . they be not in the strip prison uniform that you often see in picture . they be in they own civilian clothing , but they have wear these clothes for month and month and month without any possibility of repair . if they get a tear in the clothing , that be it .", "so I be delegate then to round up transportation and take these people out of there to this town of Hillersleben that we have liberate a couple of day before where there be a barracks and a hospital . so I round up about 60 or 70 vehicle and get they load up and get they out of the area back to Hillersleben . and of course , the medical corps go with they , and they put the sick people in the hospital , and the other go into the barracks , but first of all , as soon as we bring they back to Hillersleben , they be so dirty and stinking and filthy that there be nothing that we could do to give they clean clothing , so we have to have they strip they clothing off , and the engineer battalion set up some shower point , and we start move they through the shower -- the first shower that they have have in month and year . and as soon as they get through the shower , of course , they be give towel and soap , and they be so happy to get clean up to little bit , but even through the shower , they could not get rid of the lice that be infested in they hair and in they pubic hair . and so after they finish the shower , we dust they with ddt .", "and there I be expose to weird look professor with beard , I mean they look like hippie but hippie in the '40 , and my first thing be to nacktzeichnen . that mean draw nude . well , you know , at 11 or 12 year old , to see a naked lady in front of you , it rather leave a impact on I and I do not know , I guess my pencil be a little shake . I remember when I use my single little bit of __ _____ + everything have to be do with a pencil . well , that be where I have my first art instruction .", "so I go to the I think -lcb- ? Prinzgelstrasse ? -rcb- where the Gestapo be , and I have to undress and then examine I and they do not -- oh , I have to make something clear so it make more sense . I be bear almost circumcise , which do happen . instead of have the long foreskin -- I mean the head of the penis be stick out a little bit .", "they kind of want to hear about the Edelweisspiraten , my contact with french prisoner of war and my membership in the Hitler Youth and why I have do that , and one of they seem to be a little -- what be the word I be look for ? he do not quite trust I . so I be ask to undress , and then they look at my genitals -- genitals and one say , it be a juden . this be a jew . no , no .", "and she walk out onto another house and she -- I see -- I be right away feel something . I see she be come with a policeman . how do I know the policeman , he get there on the hand , the strip . that be the way they use to go . Came in , and he take I first to a side room , it be storage room .", "Came in , and he take I first to a side room , it be storage room . and I be wear new boot , and a new coat . and he strip I of the coat , take away the boot , and that be -- then he take in the girl , the same thing , take away whatever you get . and he ask I , where you go ? what be you go to do ?", "a : yeah , mm-hm . Q : be they clothe , or unclothed , what -- a : some of they be clothe , some of they be partially clothe , some of they be naked . Q : okay . have they obviously be starve and work ?", "the pi -- oh -- only laundry you could do be in the water without any soap , and lack of clothes breed all kind of filth , lice among they . so my mother have a routine . every couple day we have to strip , and we would look through we clothes , kill all whatever be move . Q : oh my . oh my .", "Q : wow . a : I -- when I -- when I get to the camp in Palestine , the camp 's name be Kastinna -lrb- ph -rrb- . it be in the southern part of Palestine , not far from , n-now it be call Gaza Strip . Q : ah , not far from there . a : not far from there .", "and I be always afraid to go to that room , because there be -- one wall be the glass , the opposite wall be composite of door . and later on I find out that book be on one side , and a wardrobe be on the other side . but somebody take something out of it and leave a black strip of a -- I do not know , maybe of a -- a sash , or something , but it be look at I . and when that black sash disappear , I say she die . Q : and be you right ?", "there they take we too -- again , on the sand , we have to lay . and next day they take we to -- to take shower . so one door you come in , undress , take a shower , all -- all -- all a-adult or child all mix up , you know . then you go the other door , leave the other ex -- use exit . and they give I towel that -- hand towel , the ma -- little .", "a : but they lose completely , because the army -- because the ar -- that be the army . Q : okay . a : and -- and I guess they be not the -- concerned about we , they be concern more of those soldier , because those soldier come naked almost , you know , to join the army , so -- so they -- Q : when you say they lose completely , they -- they completely forget you , or they -- a : I think so , because nobody sh-show up for we .", "so many come . they come and they make selection . we have to take out all the sick prisoner in front of the barracks , naturally naked , and officer -- beautiful dress , white glove -- and he would stand there and only with a finger he point out left or right . the one who be select to left , they be separate . and the right one , they be able to work it , maybe in a couple day , in three day they be safe .", "Dora camp be situate on the mountain , a huge camp . there I remain , I would say , maybe five day . again , undress , take shower , get new clothes . you become a new prisoner , you know . Start from the beginning .", "and when -- when they put we to Gross-Rosen we have to stay . this be October or November , something . and I have to stay naked . we have to take off everything from we . and with fever , stay like that .", "he write a book -- Dr. Bieberstein . my doctor -- he be my doctor . -lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- and when we be stay naked there -- take off all the thing -- another group in the back of we be talk to we polish . but they be separate -- they be close , in a different -- they will start to yell we , give we everything because they be take everything away from you . so we be throw whatever we could .", "eg : no . my bag be leave there where -- INT : you undress ? eg : where we go . I do not know where I lose it , but I lose it .", "and next to that be the gypsy camp . and there be other camp -- I can not recall what they be . but in the course of we be there , once it hold some thousand of hungarian girl , whom they put there totally naked . they always disappear after a , a night or while . they must have be hold they there for -- and I remember in one camp , they put russian soldier in , who , who sing these beautiful song .", "several drunk ss man arrive . -lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- with some sort of decency -- I do not know what happen -- they separate the man from we . I do not know how much the man have to undress , but we only have to undress to , to the waist . so we stand in a enormous queue , all the woman . some of the child go -- the younger child be with they mother , or so we try to tell the mother what it be all about .", "eg : lead we by the nose , we will go into -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . and there it be , the sauna near the crematorium . they make we undress . they do not shave we hair . it be miracle , -lsb- ?", "finally , they walk off . and we be alone in a german place we do not know with these uniform -- have these -- the initial of the firm go on the boot . and the -- the strip on the back , which we immediately tear off . we have hair . my friend be very pretty .", "I never know I be such a good actress . and I be bring up not to lie , and now I be live a lie . it be -- we sort of try not to , but we know if something -- or if they take we to a doctor where we have undress , that be it . and it would have mean probably a shooting somewhere or -- I do not know . anyway , it be not go to be risk .", "and then one day we hear on -- on the speaker , all the people out from the barracks and take all the clothes off . Came in a car , a big old Mercedes with three fat ss come in . and tell everybody to get naked , you know , take you clothes off , they be go to segregate people . that be what I think they be do . INT : be it a selection ?", "rs : but my older sister die on the spot . my younger one be -- have a knife through she neck , but she do not -- she do not die . she go into town , and from what I understand , they strip she naked . she go down to we neighbor , and they give she a sheet to cover herself . of course , they call the police .", "and we look at each other , and we start to giggle kind of , because we do not recognize each other . we do not recognize each other . you know , we be just stand there completely naked with bald head . it just change you whole face . I remember that .", "the shoe be separate . there be a stack of shoe , stack of underwear , and stack of pants and -- and jacket . so when we come in , he say right away to undress , everything undress , and put there on the stair . so we put everything there . and then come out , these two nilosh which they be -- be chase we up the floor , the two .", "and this be -- then he say , get dress . he throw I some kind of a rag over there , which I could not even put they on . and I come out naked with the rag in my hand , with the shoe in my hand . and this I would get to the backyard , between all of the guy who be there . and we try to put they on , little by little .", "but in he camp , in the man 's camp . but we be mostly do make work , you know ? they have -- they cut strip of fabric . and be weave those rag that you -- they still do . and -- and of course , they have to work in the kitchen .", "and they take we immediately for a bath -- shower . ok ? they make we all undress . and everybody try to keep they clothes , you know , in they little clump so they recognize it . and my mother be afraid for I .", "she do not let I go with the man . so she keep I with the woman . so I be the only boy with a multitude of naked woman . I mean , to a young kid to see all these naked -- I never even see my mother naked , practically . never mind all these old , young , skinny , fat , ugly , beautiful .", "so she keep I with the woman . so I be the only boy with a multitude of naked woman . I mean , to a young kid to see all these naked -- I never even see my mother naked , practically . never mind all these old , young , skinny , fat , ugly , beautiful . they be all -- and it be -- and every -- everything be so depressing .", "you can not go in ghetto . and then I say , you know what ? in this same strip , where the ghetto be , my brother use to work -- live on this street . I say , take I over there to the superintendent . and he take I .", "as a matter of fact , when the -lsb- ? atf ? -rsb- suspect you , that you be a jew , you have to undress yourself , and they will see if you be circumcise , yes or no . and they find a couple of guy . and they have a very , very hard time , yeah .", "and you take , all together , one shower . so we have to -- to move to get some water on you body . and you have to undress in you cell , because there be lot of flea there , and then the lice , and thing like that . and you get clean clothes after that . and they be even worse than the one we have before .", "it be bitterly cold . we have fairly good clothes . but they strip we . they take all we shoe , everything that we have , all we belongings . and they shave we .", "and I do not drink the water from the shower , whatever it be . but they do give we shower . they strip we naked . and after the shower , they open up the door . and they say , go get you new clothes .", "there be -- there be snow . and the next building be 50 foot away . and I be -- I be stark naked . and they guy by the door , the guard , say , you go to the other building for -- for you clothes . I say what ?", "he say , yes . and he kick I out . and I have to run through the three foot of snow stark naked . to the other building for my -- for my clothes . how I survive , God know only .", "there be three , four people they take . what we suppose to do ? we suppose to help they to undress , woman , child , undress , take the clothes away and put away on the side , and tell they to lay down . and the russian or Ukrainians on the top of the mountain , machine gun , kill they , just kill they . and we suppose -- we spray special chemical so there would not be typhus .", "what you have in it ? there be a little soup in it , a little water in it , or maybe they smuggle something . he take the whole commando , 60 people , tell they to turn and undress themself . and shut -- and take the clothes . a lot they do not want to undress themselves .", "he take the whole commando , 60 people , tell they to turn and undress themself . and shut -- and take the clothes . a lot they do not want to undress themselves . they say , no . you want to kill I , kill I like this .", "there , there , there . so they call we . we be suppose to strip they , un-strip they . put they inside through that . do the same thing .", "the camp be Flossenburg . there be concentration camp . they strip we , they wash we , a lot of people get kill . they put we through quarantine , you know , special camp . and then they take we out with the truck to Germany , in Germany .", "and , and I can still see it in front of my eye . and , and we go through , take we on another barracks . and , and we have to strip completely , and take everything away . we be stand nude . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- and , and they delouse we .", "mb : a constant . that be a constant process of delousing . but I would not even -- many time I would -- I would take my -- I would strip , and it be under freezing condition . because they have shower on the outside , you know . so the water become ice -- icicle .", "for the first time in my life -- I come from a home where I be very modest , you know . I be not wear slacks at home . I never undress , even from my own parent in front , since when I be already little older , you know . and here you have to disrobe completely naked before stranger . some girl have they monthly cycle and nothing to shield themselves with .", "I be not wear slacks at home . I never undress , even from my own parent in front , since when I be already little older , you know . and here you have to disrobe completely naked before stranger . some girl have they monthly cycle and nothing to shield themselves with . it be horrible .", "so we really be worse than the Jews in Egypt . we have all the plague . -lsb- sigh -rsb- a big pleasure be if you could undress the dress in time to clean off a little of the -- it be unfortunate it be very graphic , but I be tell it as it be . and we would -- still at dark . I never have a clock so I do not know what time it be .", "` dedicate to all those whose voice have be silence forever in the Holocaust from 1933 'til 1945 . when age of civilization crumble to dust and death be rage supreme , when the devil be crown by the power of deceit , then freedom be a faraway thing . when all that you have love be take from you and you be strip to the bare bone , when all moral boundary and law be break , then you be in hell with satan alone . when jew be depict as subhuman , as vermin , and brute force and evil prevail , when doctor and nurse turn child to corpse , then all logic and reason fail . when the whole world remain dead silent , with the exception of just a few , then they grant Satan license and opportunity to murder in the gas chamber a god-loving jew .", "and then on the way home -- before I would go home , I would collect a bag of -- they would collect it for I , you know , when they would print , let 's say , poster . and they would cut they . and all of the thing -- the paper strip that would fall off would be put in a bag . and then if they do ledger , and they puncture these round hole , which make a bag of confetti . well of course , I be -- I be absolutely it with a capital I when I come back home .", "and if I tell you what laundry mean , you would probably change you mind about what laundry be all about . but anyhow , the munitions factory be produce cannon for armament . and my job be to put the cannon on some kind of a machine that turn , and to set a little knife to it , and the knife would strip off the first strip . you know , like -- like peel a sausage type . you know ?", "and they beat we if anything be not do right . and in fact , you know , a piece -- this be very hot metal , you understand ? this strip , it be like a apple . you know when you peel a apple , and the thing go and go and go , the skin ? well , this be analogous .", "well , this be analogous . it be that way . and at one time , a piece of that hot metal , that -- that strip , burst and it fall in here . so to this day , I have a scar here and in between my toe . to this day , this be my -- the -- this be the souvenir I take out of that factory .", "I mean , I just do not know these thing . but we be on the same premise , you know ? the -- the -- the cannon strip be adjacent to that smelting oven , whatever you call it . and this be where a lot of man die from the camp . keep die .", "HG : people that do try to run -- to escape , and people start to know what be happen . where it be suppose to be at every of those death camp , they have a sign , Arbeit macht frei , mean work make free . so when we undre -- first we have to undress in front of ss man . mind you , SS man . Stark naked , walk by , to go in into the shower .", "so when we undre -- first we have to undress in front of ss man . mind you , SS man . Stark naked , walk by , to go in into the shower . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and we know we be go for the sure death . but we do not .", "we be not name . so we go in . again , we have to undress , walk in front of the assessment , and whoever be accept they take the number of what we have on the dress -- well , dress . you should pardon the expression . anyhow , four of we go through it .", "we go to Skarzyska quickly . it be in a ammunition factory . for that , we have to parade naked , right ? to go to a -- to go to it . and all I have be a half-torn dress , that I wind up there .", "or we would come back with underwear -- it be get cold -- and so on . but one day , we group be stop . -lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- and the ss at the door , at the entrance -- and the ss ask three girl , -lsb- point -rsb- like this , you , you , and you come forward and undress . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- of course , they find clothing on they . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- so we have to witness the hanging of the three girl .", "nobody be allow to look out or go out of the barrack . I be very curious and go to the gate of we hospital barrack , and say , hospital should have some privilege , and open a little bit the gate to look out . and what I see be naked woman in the woman 's lager throw -- I be sorry . INT : that be ok . GB : throw onto a car -- I mean , a truck .", "GB : throw onto a car -- I mean , a truck . so it seem to I younger woman -- I mean , at some distance . they be all naked , and they be really throw , and with hand up in the air , and leg be spread out there , scream -lsb- non-english -rsb- . INT : scream what ? GB : some jewish religious --", "they would have have to go through Auschwitz . so we group go through Gross Rosen . after we have the shower , after they clean we -- this be we be still stand naked without the shirt . we be stand naked , 700 man in November . it be below zero .", "so we group go through Gross Rosen . after we have the shower , after they clean we -- this be we be still stand naked without the shirt . we be stand naked , 700 man in November . it be below zero . I do not know how we survive .", "it be a horrible thing . people be half-frozen . naked , frozen people with all kind of shape . you could not take they out because they skin be freeze to the floor from the wagon . you have to put hot water to get they out .", "but in the summertime , she use to take it off . and she want to have it wash and everything like that . and when I wash it -- and I be naked . and when I put it back on , there be more lice than I have before . and it be -- so I say , I do not have you wash my clothes anymore .", "so they be probably look for dollar , so maybe other -- they be look for smuggler . but since I have these few item that I buy for the 200 zloty , they first , they take this away from I . and then they tell I to undress almost completely , to the point where there be -- if there be a little seam , they be try on the seam if I do not have something sew in . and at that time , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- after they have take away my item -- some of the personal belongings , too , but not too many , and they give I back . and they say at 4 o'clock in the morning , we will take you to the water .", "and we be tell we can not go forwards , and nobody from the back can come to we because the road be unsafe . and we be there probably a week or more , surround by the Germans until they sort of like thin out . some of they maybe go to they own home or they undress . but until the road get safe and , and we continue until we come -- already in April , we come to a town which be call Biesenthal . and in my opinion , it be south of Berlin , perhaps 35 , 40 kilometer south of Berlin .", "they also do not survive in -- under the Germans . one be also in Russia , and he be a dental technician . he be in the russian army , but because he see we , he also decide to undress . he be still alive . he be in Israel .", "they draw a circle in chalk . it must have be like , oh , 30 inch in diameter . and they make we strip all the way . and we all have to step into that circle and turn front and back to -- to these three people . and after see we , we be give a number on a string .", "and I walk in the krankenstube . he say , lay down on the bed . only , I , I can not promise you when the -- tomorrow come here from Auschwitz a doctor with the -- with the other ss people , and they take you off naked . and they look at you . and they will test you .", "yeah . so to enter the ghetto be not so difficult . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- well , I see terrible thing , starvation and humiliation , naked body , only the middle cover by some newspaper . when I ask my guide what do it mean , he say , the Germans want we to pay for burial . there be no money .", "there be no money . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- now , every -- every shred of -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- vestment be need . so , you know , naked body -- only cover the middle . I see horrible , horrible thing . woman feed baby , but they have no breast , you know .", "that be -- we find out later from one man that run away . and they take they out -- the woman , the kid , and all the man . they dress they naked , because the idea also be , in meantime , they have the clothes . they can use it . or somebody have a chain , or somebody have a watch .", ". you would get assemble together , and then you would march maybe five , six mile away . and there you would undress -- just like they do in other place where they gas the people , except here there be no gas . INT : so you be say that if you have hear that , you would have be afraid . JB : have my -- not , not i. No .", "and they have the POWs , the german prisoner , the one that they have catch before they could leave into -- you know , retreat into Germany . and I remember the snow . because I remember prisoner be march naked in the snow by the Americans . INT : these be german prisoner -- RF : yes .", "and Ilse Koch be try . those lamp shades be use as evidence against she . after that , we be -- we have to undress , naked , and they delouse we , which mean they have other prisoner . and they use some kind of disinfectant on you body , and you be shave . all you hair on you body and you head .", "and there be not a day that I remember that he be not drunk . we have to get out in the middle of the night and to stand on the Appellplatz , which be the center of the camp . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- we have to -- in the wintertime , I remember we have to stand naked there . we have to crawl in the snow , and the winter be severe there . most of the time , he do this -- what he call gymnastics after you come in from a day 's work , from 10 , 12 hour in the factory .", "I remember he well . he be a Czech . he be from Czechoslovakia , and they have he body display at the exit , naked , with bullet wound -- wound , and they have a sign next to it say , this man try to escape , and this be the price he have to pay . and then , when we come to this point , you all have to turn all we head to make sure that we be look at this particular portrait . and -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- other incident -- they just fabricate thing .", "but then Schindler think , you know , that -- but I could not , because they be watch the other gate . Plenty SS man . so they give I , naked , you know , 50 on my behind . INT : because you try to escape ? HW : to escape .", "it be snow . he say , out with a blanket . because we be naked there . blanket , a pair of shoe . get out !", "it be hard to go there , because it be very hot inside . it be steam . you have -- you have to undress , pull you clothes into a little package . you sort they to a oven . they come out the other side .", "but the lice be burn . so you take back you clothes and put it on . but to wait -- to wait there , naked until the clothes come out . it be very , very hot . and some people do not want -- maybe they be hot .", "I be with my mother all the time . and of course , the first place they take we to , they walk we into the sauna , which be the -- supposedly the delousing room , or whatever . but we , at that point , already have hear what happen in Auschwitz , so when they tell we to strip and take we clothes off , and they shave we head and all that , and they shove we into the -- -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- the shower room , you know , we do not know what to expect , you know ? whether we be go to have the gas , or whether we be go to have actual water . it be a horrible experience , you know ?", "but anyway , they take some of the woman -- 35 or 40 woman -- to do work or something . but the rest of the barrack be take to -- for a selection . again , we be tell to strip and walk through . and on the first run through , Dr. Mengele push I to the left side with some of the older woman . and then , I do not know what happen .", "INT : you and you mother . RK : there be a selection . we all come out naked in the -- in the -- on that platz , what do you call ? INT : the place in front . I know .", "and after they shave we , they dunk -- they dunk we . we have to go in in a vat with disinfectant there , which be burn like fire . and then we be naked . we be stand in line . in the meantime , by the time it be my turn , other one have come out already , with the russian uniform .", "and we be go towards a table . from a distance , I notice there be a table . and I hear a girl say to lie down naked there on the table . and the officer and with rubber glove , the german officer , be do something to they . and she be scream .", "and no underwear , nothing at all . just the uniform with the hole and with the lice in it because there be already for month there , for a whole year , I think . and a piece of wood , for -- different size of wood with a leather strip . and that be all the clothes that we get . and with that clothes , we go .", "and they be treat horribly there . it be a cold November night . they have to shed all they clothes and stand shiver for hour naked in the -- in the open air . INT : who tell you this ? jd : my uncle , my father 's brother , who be with he .", "after November 9 , 1938 , they be not allow to bring anything but maybe a -- a little handbag and $ 10 . but my mother be still allow to bring -- to bring my parent 's furniture and possession , so practical possession . they be totally strip of they money because , first of all , they have to pay for everything that they -- that they take . they have to pay it over again , which I believe I have already mention . and then another thing .", "jd : this be the grave of my grandparent in Furth , Joseph and Laura Dispeker . and it show -- that they -- how the metal plate that you see on this picture , be take off and be take away during the war when the country need metal badly . and when we find the grave year later , it be barren , without -- and strip of any name or any -- any way of recognize who be bury there . crew : what year do you think this picture be take in ? jd : this picture be probably take in -- in the 1920s , but when -- when -- when -- when -- when -- when everything be still in good shape .", "there be toilet there . and there be room . they tell we to undress . they put everything neat , and who know where it would go . so everybody put away nice they clothes .", "so we go in the other room . and a few minute later , the man come in , not woman . everybody be naked . -lsb- background noise -rsb- and the man come in , they tell we to spread we leg , to spread we hand , they shave we wherever there be a hair on we body . they shave we .", "the blood that be flow from everybody -- from they head , from they arm pit from everybody . and the humiliation , the feeling -- this be a most terrible thing that can happen to a young girl . when somebody -- you know , you have never undress for nobody , just for yourself , and here come bully . who know , maybe not . I do not know what kind of man these be .", "they could not take in all of the people who come in . they take they , so many in the room . they undress they . they tell they the same thing , to put nice together the clothes . and they open up another room , and there be sprinkler , and they go inside .", "and I be work when the people -- the people who be select to come to the camp , I be work on the side in the bath . there be a dirty side and a clean side . I be work where the people have to undress . on the other side there be work people who would dress they . so they clothes , they have to leave everything .", "I know from Hungary be the most in 1944 . they do not have the faintest idea , even the people who come in . so we undress they . and from we place they have to go in where they clean they . they clean they , they shave they , they clean they .", "sh : yes , yes . this be the end of 1945 . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- they , they undress the grown-up . and I , they let through . in fact , he smile at I , the policeman .", "but the farmer want to monkey business with she on the way and take she off the -- off the wagon . and she be -- she carry a whip in she boot . and then she get herself disengage from this farmer , take out a whip , and whip that farmer really badly , and leave he there -- actually , naked . and she take the horse and the wagon and drive into the ghetto . and I meet they later on in the ghetto .", "we have to stay over there a few day to wait until we get new order , where to go . and I look around at the Gilboa and say , there be nothing in there . everything be naked , you know ? I mean , nothing grow here . and then , I remember , you know , the Bible say , you know , about Saul -- King Saul , you know , when he helper , you know , adjutant , you know , die , and he be very , very much nervous about it .", "IR : in Debrecen , before we go to Sangeorz , we be in this big , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- huge place . I do not know what kind of place it be . we have to get naked . we have to take we clothes off . everything , stark naked .", "we have to get naked . we have to take we clothes off . everything , stark naked . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- they be put -- they be disinfect we with petroleum . they wash we hair with this , underarm , private part .", "they wash we hair with this , underarm , private part . everywhere where hair be grow , it have to be wash . then , and still naked , they have to -- they be take we fingerprint . for what , for what , I do not know . nothing be explain to we .", "and then a -- like a sheet or something , a blue sheet be give . and in this nakedness , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- my thought -- first of all , I be -- I do not know . I be -- I be shock to see so much naked body . I never see naked body . it be amazing .", "and in this nakedness , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- my thought -- first of all , I be -- I do not know . I be -- I be shock to see so much naked body . I never see naked body . it be amazing . shocking , scary -- very scary by that time .", "HW : -- before Schindler . INT : good . HW : and -- and we see jewish girl that be strip naked and shot over there . they bring they from -- from the ghetto , from Krakow itself , because they be sort of on Aryan papers . in other word , they -- they pose as Poles .", "in other word , they -- they pose as Poles . and they be point by somebody that they be Jewesses . and they be strip naked over there and kill . and we have to bury they . INT : do you remember when that take place ?", "and they be sadist -- all of they -- very sadistic . they be -- they -- they , you know , they behave over there , and we -- we could not wait . they strip we , first of all , naked -- all completely naked . they give we purposely clothing everybody do not belong to . if you be fat , they give you a small .", "INT : how do you find out what be happen at Auschwitz ? pb : well , we do not find out for the longest time . we , we be march to a barracks , and then we be tell to undress . and the first person go to one room , and the person first cut we hair off , first with the scissor . and then we go to the next room , and then they shave we all , both we hair and under the arm and the pubic hair , everyplace .", "see how much money we have ? -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and of course , this whole money last just a few hour . because when we leave , and they assemble we at the Jewish Community Center over there , everybody be strip , and everybody have to open he pocket inside out . and many people be ask to get undressed . that be the first time I see that .", "we do not know anything . and we know now these people be march to these building . they be ask to undress , to put they clothes neatly , and they be -lsb- german -rsb- , disinfection . and they be usher into this room where there be look like shower . now we know instead of shower they turn on these zyklon b gas faucet and they gas these poor soul .", "-lsb- pause for 10 seconds -rsb- while my brother and my dad , we be usher the other way on the double . we run to these barracks follow order , hope , you know , to see the family . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- we have to undress . -lsb- pause for 6 seconds -rsb- they shear we hair from all over we body . I be just a kid .", "all we could hold on be we shoe and we belt . they take all of we clothing away . we be naked . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- I remember I hold onto picture of my family I dare take along . while in the shower I put they inside my shoe .", "within three month they dwindle down to nothing but skin and bone . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- they have to stand in line for selection . and we have to run through naked through the Nazis and overseer . and they take we number . all those whose number be take -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- be select .", "while in the concentration camp in Jaworzno , we have selection every once in a while . all those who be incarcerate -- most of they -- most of they be reduce to nothing but skin and bone within three month . and they be -- we have to go through , run across , a certain area naked . and they look we over , and anyone not deem worthy of make -- keep alive be select . and they be put on a truck , and they be cart off to -- to -- to Birkenau .", "there be no moon . it be terribly dark . and the kid from b'richa be there , practically naked , in the water -- blow -- blow rubber boat that we get from the american army . and we be put 10 or 12 in a rubber boat . and they have already , before we come , establish a wire between the beach and the boat that be about two mile away in the deep sea .", "meanwhile , the second line , undressed and be chase . and so on , and so on . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- -lsb- sigh -rsb- we undress . -lsb- pause for 6 seconds -rsb- on my left side , like I tell you , be my rabbi of the Talmud , rabbi -lsb- non-english -rsb- . somehow he get faster undressed than I be , or my father , who be in the first line .", "-lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- take a rest , I breathe for a couple minute . and I figure , I will go back to -lsb- inaudible -rsb- , to the same farmer when I run away , when I put the german in between the building , the way I know . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- I start to go , naked . naked except the cover -- the only cover I get be the blood . INT : be the -- be the blood ?", "and I figure , I will go back to -lsb- inaudible -rsb- , to the same farmer when I run away , when I put the german in between the building , the way I know . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- I start to go , naked . naked except the cover -- the only cover I get be the blood . INT : be the -- be the blood ? ZM : the blood of my father , of my brother , of -lsb- inaudible -rsb- .", "a kilometer into the forest , think that I be go to -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- three Poles come against I , in the direction of Ejszyszki , and I be on the other direction . and they see I naked . oh , -lsb- non-english -rsb- , a jew . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- where be you go ?", "and they start to beat we . they catch one guy from Ejszyszki , Teivele Blacher , who be also on the picture there in the -lsb- yiddish -rsb- with I . and they undress we . and they put such a big -- a small table in the middle , such a little area table . and they undress we again .", "and they undress we . and they put such a big -- a small table in the middle , such a little area table . and they undress we again . and they see I be still , I be still wound . and they start to ask I , where be the scratch ?", "so I be in the soup . I can -- can I save myself ? and they undress we and put we on the -- on a wall . and one by one they be put on the bent -- the bench . and they start to beat with stick , with whip , whatever everybody can catch .", "with my whole image , with my body , and with my mind , I be there . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and then when I be tell you , it be like it be real . I be 16 year old , naked in the haystack . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- I be not expose to nature . I be a city boy , when suddenly in one week , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- all I that I go through , lose everybody , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- get -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- humiliate .", "I put myself -- the sack on myself . I make a hole . and it be like a -- a dress on I , around my neck , not to be naked . but that be so rough , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- the sack on I , it be bother I . my body be full with wound .", "and it be leak blood . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- so it be bother I . so I complete naked . eventually , my sense of direction do not help I to go to Juzia -- the same place where I run away in the first place . that be early in morning .", "Black , all black . the blood form on he behind still black . we be beat naked . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and one time this be . so we go back there in the camp and all .", "they bring they out , you know . they put they in the middle of the circle . they undress they . and they beat they and whip they so hard . but they do not shoot they .", "when he go over to each line , and he check out each line . we be show we body , that we have no sore , no . we be like , naked now . but no sore , no -- no any kind of disease , no . and he pick out this one , they go over here .", "on the other side be woman . it be very cold . and in the snow be spot of blood because the woman be naked . in fact , I put it in my book . the wire be not electrify .", "ms : no . no . just stay naked and they do not have the facility , how to clean they , so just drip down they leg . INT : be you also undress , naked ? ms : oh , yeah .", "no . just stay naked and they do not have the facility , how to clean they , so just drip down they leg . INT : be you also undress , naked ? ms : oh , yeah . I be a naked -lsb- non-english -rsb- when I be there .", "INT : be you also undress , naked ? ms : oh , yeah . I be a naked -lsb- non-english -rsb- when I be there . they take all we clothes because we clothes be completely infect with lice . and I keep my hat , my cap .", "INT : what be you number ? ms : 26203 . INT : and so you say you be lie there naked . ms : we be lie there practically naked , cover in a blanket . and there be a lady -- no , no .", "ms : 26203 . INT : and so you say you be lie there naked . ms : we be lie there practically naked , cover in a blanket . and there be a lady -- no , no . there be a guy come by .", "so they organize one train where all these people from all these camp . finally , my brother , he see I , oh , start cry . he wear a german uniform because he be naked . and he take off a german uniform from a german guy who be kill there . when the Germans escape , the first thing they do , take of the uniform , the ss , and they throw it away .", "that could be , naturally . I assume it would be . then without a eventful -- yeah , what I also , what also happen during that time be that they -- we have sometimes to undress and to -- well , that be they pleasure or whatever , to undress and to go to see if you be all healthy and you have no lice . and that also happen . otherwise , as I can recall , we go on we way to --", "I get nowhere . I get a lousy letter , and that be all what they do . one of the experience -- what bring you back that whatever you do sometimes -- the Kingston Affair with those woman be -- be ok , whatever woman they be , be search and be naked in the cell there -- bring back again the -- the experience that I have be nude and -- and more or less inspect by the Germans . there be little tidbit . in the beginning , when I be go the go train , there be a -- a factory , whatever be import credit .", "MW : No -- nothing . because anything we take to Auschwitz , it be take from we anyway . and when you arrive to Auschwitz , they undress you , be naked , cut you hair . and either you go to one side to live , either you go to the other side , which we do not know . they be one side for life , the other side maybe have a chance to survive .", "INT : Ditch ? mg : Ditch . they tell they to undress , and then they shoot they , and they fall in -- in the ditch . INT : and they do this -- the whole town ? mg : yes .", "I be , at that time , in the -lsb- non-english -rsb- , which be the transition camp , the temporary camp . and it be right on the route of the truck that go from the woman 's camp , past we camp , into the crematorium , to the gas chamber . and they have woman naked on -- on -- on truck . and they be scream and yell , and they know what be happen by that time . once you be in Auschwitz , you know what the purpose of Auschwitz be .", "and they be scream and yell , and they know what be happen by that time . once you be in Auschwitz , you know what the purpose of Auschwitz be . and once they take you , naked , on a truck , you know what be go to happen . there be no question in they mind as to what they -- be go to happen to they . INT : and that be ?", "size ? -rsb- be not so apparent . and -- but it do not help , because we be naked . he examine we naked . and by that time , I be already skinnier -- -lsb- drink -rsb- and I be reject .", "be not so apparent . and -- but it do not help , because we be naked . he examine we naked . and by that time , I be already skinnier -- -lsb- drink -rsb- and I be reject . so I go around .", "but we do not know whether this be it , or whether this be just a regular shower . and we stay -- stay there the whole night in that shower , not know what they be go to do for we . and we be naked and cold . and there be nowhere to sit . and you know , we body do not have very much flesh on they anymore .", "I guess it be in style today , but at that time , it be not in style . but my head be not shave . I go in one room , with other , naturally , and I be totally undressed to be naked . and I go through a segregation , to the left and the right . INT : who be make that selection ?", "there be no debate or if or but . they be in command of you life . INT : what about stand there naked among all of those people ? fg : well , I be not the only one naked . everybody in the line before I and after I be nude .", "they be in command of you life . INT : what about stand there naked among all of those people ? fg : well , I be not the only one naked . everybody in the line before I and after I be nude . and this be also where I have see mother with child be separate .", "and they take all the sick people out of the barracks into the open field . and they shoot one by one , and the doctor , and all the people that be work with she . it be the most horrible night that you can imagine because the people be undressed naked in you presence , and one by one , be take out . there always be a open grave outside because they should not have to be bother . so they just push you in .", "but it do not go so quick . they tortured we for hour . slowly , she have to undress , and they be talk to she about she family . and then they take she out and shoot she . -lsb- sigh -rsb- the follow week , most probably , the , the , the Polish family find out that those parent be kill .", "and to -- they tell you , everything you have , you have to give they , all you clothes . and then you go into shower . you walk into one door , and you stand naked there . and on the other side , they give you some clothes full of blood that be not yours . it do not matter because that be clothes that they have kill already people before .", "some people obey the order , because that order that be give in Hungary be against the law . the Germans have the jurisdiction over these people , not the Hungarians , as far as I know . so -- and here , there be really no choice , because you have to abandon all you clothing , all you suitcase , and you be naked . so what could you keep ? oh , the shoe I could keep .", "and to make a note of you transport number , which become a id number . and I suppose to keep , as german be want to do in those day , a card catalog of whoever be there . the medical examination , all I remember of it be we have to strip naked . now , whether that be because they want to see that we be -- whether we be hide something , I do not know . I do not offhand remember actually be examine , but we might have be .", "what it be in Theresienstadt , it be a nice euphemism for official stealing . officially , it be , again , registration and medical examination . in actual fact , we get strip naked again . and by the time you get you luggage back , which go a slightly different way , half of it have disappear . half of you clothes have disappear .", "but we can not go . they use to give examination . the minute they undress I , I be finish -- we be finish . we get three boy to go for we with the papers . and they get -- they go through .", "it be January . it be 40 or 50 celsius below zero . we be naked . then we get a -- a burst , a splash , of ice cold water from the spray . and then after another couple of minute , boiling water .", "it be like a sandpaper , but much thicker . and that be what we have to sleep . we have to take off everything , naked , and sleep , sleep on , on those paper . INT : what time of year be this ? sb : this be in ' 44 .", "close to the -- the german border . and then we be take to the french part of Switzerland , actually , in a resort place for which there be no customer at that time . and we be house in a resort hotel , which of course be strip of its luxury feature . and there we stay for several month . INT : when the war end , do you decide to stay in Switzerland , or do you think of return to Hungary ?", "and she say , shh . and I do not know what I do , but we have to stand there and be count all over again . now , in my mind , I remember stand naked with everybody . but I think my mother say that we be not naked , just that we be cold , and we be wear almost nothing . INT : what do you do for clothes in Bergen-Belsen ?", "and I do not know what I do , but we have to stand there and be count all over again . now , in my mind , I remember stand naked with everybody . but I think my mother say that we be not naked , just that we be cold , and we be wear almost nothing . INT : what do you do for clothes in Bergen-Belsen ? ss : we be able to -- to run to the -- to camp -- when they get we , we be able to take a little bundle of stuff .", "in fact , he show we the tattoo , you know , that they have on they hand . and he be ready to , to be gas and kill . he be already undress and get ready to be kill . and suddenly , he be tell to put he clothes on and see the commander of Auschwitz . the other be kill .", "and when you see a crack , you take two finger , and you go and you dig down on the both side of the stalk , and then you take you knife into it . you have to go all the way down so you -- and you have to stand up and do this . you can not kneel down because you will have -- you will ruin the -- the -- you can only be in the narrow strip between the bed . so you have to stand up be bent over like this . that be the beginning of my back treatment .", "and they , they invite they to show that the Jews have a wonderful life . and they make -- actually they make a movie . I be in the movie , but I have be try for 50 year to get a strip of it . somebody in the center in Brandeis give I a strip , but I be not on there . I have a three , five minute piece of tape from the movie .", "and they make -- actually they make a movie . I be in the movie , but I have be try for 50 year to get a strip of it . somebody in the center in Brandeis give I a strip , but I be not on there . I have a three , five minute piece of tape from the movie . the -- it be call -- the movie be call the Fuhrer give the Jews a city .", "ra : it be like , like a room . you think it be a shower with show head and tile . you will be strip naked . but you know that it be not water come out , but gas . INT : how many people be in the room with you ?", "before the night come , they tell we to go . they put we in line and take we over to the place where the polish Army use to be -- barracks . and they make room for they to be strip over there and stay there for a while . then later , after three , four -- about two month , there be a city be -- a street -- the worst street in London . INT : in Berezne .", "the other one run in the other corner . we do not run for the other one . and I just naked the way I be . and I run into a farmer . INT : you be naked ?", "and I just naked the way I be . and I run into a farmer . INT : you be naked ? JG : because we dry out the thing by the fire . INT : the clothes .", "they get , everybody get some . they give you pants , they give you everything . I be leave naked . in between time , I meet a guy , he come from , what do they call they ? russian he be .", "and I say -- and I hear -- in the shower , I hear a noise . and I go in . and it be a naked russian showering , and step on my door , you know ? and I go in . I pull he -lsb- laugh -rsb- up here .", "it be November . it be very cold in Buchenwald . and the first thing they do , they undress we they take every possession what we have . we do not have anything , papers , a picture , a key , or something . but they take everything away from we .", "and that be it . and they give you -- later , they give you the -- they give you -- you get to -- the clothes . you get take off all the cloud , naked . and they give you the blue and white , you know , uniform , the Dachau uniform . you know .", "we be hold onto each other . and we be load on track , and we be cart off . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- then we come to another camp where we be unloaded and usher into barracks , we to undress , take shower . we be -- all we hair be cut from you head , all over the body . and we be give uniform , you know , prison uniform , striped one .", "and then , when it be do , I sort of hate it . but now , I sort of get a kick out of it . if you could come up a little bit with that picture so that you can see the naked knee , which belong to the german trend . you see ? now , if you go to the next photo , which -- here again , at this photo , I be at the right and my brother the left .", "they be terribly dedicated people which do -- it be some boy which be from very well-to-do home and girl . and they be so dedicate to this purpose . they do strip themselves of all the comfort . and -lsb- sigh -rsb- they be the ` haluzim , ' which only do sing of one thing , to go to Israel and do hard work . there be a lot of place which be try -- it be call ` hachsharah . '", "ar : I be not sure about the third time . once he -- Himmler come to Plaszow ghetto . and we do have to strip -- all people do have to strip naked -- completely naked . though we -- and it be a selection . that be the most -- and he be just there stand , very powerful and joke with Goth , and -- -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb-", "and they be bring transport of people -- jewish and non-jewish -- and shoot they to the grave and burn they . so the smell of -- you know , up in the air of these body be just absolutely unbelievable . I -- I do -- I do see , on one occasion , where the mother do carry -- she have -- do have -- they do strip naked always . and she do go walk with the child in she arm , with a infant , to the grave which be prepare . and there be a woman 's -- woman ss -- ss woman as well as man .", "it -- -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- I suppose you do try to breathe in between , you know ? you do have to . and then , I remember there be some heap of funny clothes , and everybody try -- because we be naked . after the shower be no towel or anything . so everybody do try to grab whatever they can from the heap of clothes .", "INT : what be he do ? ar : in a relax sort of -- relax way watch all this atrocity and whatever . I think he enjoy the naked parade . I would say he do . because twice , when I meet he , that be be on the occasion with be the selection , and we have be naked .", "I think he enjoy the naked parade . I would say he do . because twice , when I meet he , that be be on the occasion with be the selection , and we have be naked . INT : so you think he arrange it so that he could be there when they be go on ? ar : I would say so .", "there be a big -lsb- non-english -rsb- it be call -lsb- non-english -rsb- . and there be a german doctor . everybody have to strip naked . so he say , here , leave be to life , right be to Auschwitz . and in the mid -- everybody be stand .", "but I -- I be so -- I try not to see it . I try to , to , to lower my , my eye . because it be a terrible sight , terrible sight , to see people strip and , and flog , 25 time or 50 time . INT : how would you know how many time ? MT : because it be a routine expression .", "it could be whatever there . it be in a pile . when you be , you know , there , they -- they undress we . and you have to pick -- run , one -- whatever come to you . like , it could be one girl tall , tall with a small , small blouse ; one -- one girl very short with a -- with a evening dress .", "and you have to pick a item . and you have to keep the item forever . day and night , like you can not undress during the night -- the same item . so we be full of lice . you know , what do you expect ?", "-lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- and the rest be history for everybody . they take away those little suitcase what we have from we . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and they put we in -- in a room , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- naked . and they cut we hair . and -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- just woman .", "we be in the lineup . and as the people be come out from the checkup and registration , we ask if they -- how do they check . and they say they undress everybody , presumably check if somebody be jewish , so they could check . well , in that case , we decide we can not go to Germany because they would undress we and find out we be Jews and we be finish . Change of tape", "and as the people be come out from the checkup and registration , we ask if they -- how do they check . and they say they undress everybody , presumably check if somebody be jewish , so they could check . well , in that case , we decide we can not go to Germany because they would undress we and find out we be Jews and we be finish . Change of tape INT : ' 96 .", "SG : from the city . they march they , and they tell they to take they belongings , whatever , because they be go to work in a camp . and instead of that , they march they down to the field , and they tell they to undress , and they shoot they . INT : the man , woman , and child . but surely , you must have think of you own family .", "I say , I never know it about they escape or planning or anything because they never speak to I . anyways , do not help I . they beat I up , and I have to strip myself . and I get on my behind 10 very badly -- with a big strap . I could not sit for a number of week .", "or we be go to be gas and destroy . each and every one be shake . they ask we to undress . we do . and we walk in .", "after that be -- I remember like today -- be a very cold and rainy evening . they start to drag we around the camp . we have to run , like six in a row , all around the camp , for maybe 2 hour , naked , without any clothing whatsoever . we come back again . and they give we -- each and everybody get slacks and a shirt or whatever .", "and one of the first thing -- it be right after the war of independence . one of the first thing they do be they teach you how to protect yourself , because it be still at a time where there be shooting go on . we live real -- we live , like , two mile from the border , from the egyptian border , you know , of the Gaza Strip . you could see Gaza on the horizon , you know . it be -- that be how close it be , ok ?", "and when my mother see that , she immediately make a about-turn . and we go back to out home . and that be where we know , that be when we see the naked truth of what this be all about . that be the day of revelation . and -- so mother realize that it be very dangerous to circulate , and especially with child because wherever there be -- we notice , we have notice or hear that , if you be -- if you be catch -lsb- inaudible -rsb- with they child , there would be no -- no two way about it , we will just be deport .", "so he take she up . and you can imagine that -- the -- the laugh and the cry and the expression of emotion , every emotion in human being . so my mother take -- undress Alex and put he into a bath . and he be full of ulcer everywhere . you know , so she be put feather thing , you know , protect it .", "and so they agree . and they go back to she room -- at the time , she be already live somewhere else -- and when she come , they walk in with she into the room , and she say , would you mind wait outside ? I only have a room , one room , and I can not undress when you be present . and they say , ok . and so they walk out of the room .", "and after , you know , they finish , a old man , the shamash , be take down the Torah , and there be four step . and he stumble , fall , and the Torah fall out of he hand . and not only that , but the cover of the Torah , the cloth , be pull off , and the Torah , naked , lay there on the floor . and that be a terrible tragedy . the -- -- community , they divide 40 people .", "that night , all night long , the blood be drip on my -- either my head or my shoulder or wherever . when the light come , my uncle look at I , and I be cover with blood , so they think that they shoot I . so they start to strip I to see where the blood be come from , but it be not . but I think that be the most horrible night of my life , like a chinese torture . and I know it be blood , because I feel it be like glue sticking to I .", "they tell we we can not leave the train station because there be a curfew . the Russians occupy Budapest . and whoever get out on the street , they strip they naked . -lsb- laugh -rsb- the Russians be unbelievable in horde . these be the Mongolians .", "as : yes , yes . INT : ok . as : and it be -- it be pave with those perforated steel strip . have you see those thing ? in other word , a temporary army installation .", "INT : do you know how he get the poison ? as : they be argue about it . apparently , they -- they claim that old Colonel Andrus , who be in charge of the prison , who be not too sharp , have all these people bring in when they first -- he would have they strip and search , include the probe of they bodily cavity , eh ? and somehow , the Nazis have prepare little vial of sodium cyanide -- potassium cyanide . poison , see ?", "ms : Pardon ? INT : be the body clothe ? ms : no , most of they be naked . some have tatters , you know , dress in tatters , but I suppose they die on the spot . they use to drop dead in the camp .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- again , there be no way of hiding . we be call on Sunday to Appelplatz . we have to undress , and they be look through , walk in between we . who have not be still fairly well-padded be take out on the side . and woman whose breast be already flat and hanging be take out of the row of people and put aside .", "when I see a opportunity to pinch some of the clothes that we be suppose to wash and dry , it be better to what I be wear . so I put it on -- quite a few garment . and on the way back home , I look under that thing , which be belong to the camp , that strip thing . I have put quite a few dress -- do not know how many -- maybe 4 , 5 , 6 . INT : you put they on yourself ?", "and he look . and he say , -lsb- GERMAN -rsb- . undress . I do . 1 , 2 , 3 -- he be count and whipping I .", "corpse walk , walk corpse . everyone with diarrhea , with black run on they leg . no -- the lower part of the clothing strip completely , because they be run from the block where they sleep to the trench where they be -- there be no latrine . that be where -- where do they business . some of they do not even go back to the block .", "I be barefoot . I be only in this , in the panties . my brother be always naked walk around . it be summertime . it be hot .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- it be still in -- it be still in the middle of the night . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- they be bring we in to a big building . and they be tell we all to undress . and the only thing that we can take with we be we shoe and go to the next -- to another room in the building where they shave everybody 's head . and we be be put in a room -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- where when we walk into that room , we see the woman that make it to that point .", "they be face one way , and we be face another way . INT : do you have clothes on ? es : we be all naked . the only thing that we have in we hand be we shoe . -lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- we be give order to go into another room .", "I have not see a female from that point on till after we be liberate . because in the camp , we be separate . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- when we go on to the other room , with we hair , all naked with we shoe in we hand , they be issue we , it look like pajamas -- striped clothes . we get the striped clothes . there be no question as to size .", "we be not just jewish prisoner . we be from all country , all walk of life , all kind of age , whoever survive . they make we undress . take off all we dirty clothes . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- they put -- oh yeah .", "and he have sort of a drill material pair of trousers with elastic in the waist . and underneath that I have a culotte . and the culotte be stitch in the center , double that there be a little hole , a strip go up to my waist . and we stuff the Napoleon in there . and Napoleon be like we , 6 -- 5 cent now .", "everyone have to wear a armband . INT : what kind of a armband do you have to wear ? LH : it be a white strip about four inch wide , and a Magen David from -- -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- -lsb- inaudible -rsb- -- write down on it , or sewn on it , a armband . INT : do anybody try to run away from the ghetto ? LH : some of they , they be run away from the ghetto .", "-lsb- inaudible -rsb- boy -lsb- non-english -rsb- . and you know what happen ? he tell I -- they order I to get naked . he be check I have money here in the -lsb- non-english -rsb- . I be shake .", "mz : then they start to come out with a ordinance -- be that they be prepare for the war with Russia , they take away all the fur that the people have . not the question of fur coat or fur lining -- anything that they have . even if a coat have a fur collar , you have to strip you collar and deliver the collar to the Germans . it be -lsb- ? Sammelstelle -- ? -rsb-", "you try to hang a , a sheet or something to get some privacy for the night , because you still be human . you still be , be live a normal life . but after a while , you -- after a few day , you already be -- you do not see -- you do not care whether somebody see you undress or not anymore . and the food you get be from the communal kitchen . be just -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- water with some kind of a vegetable maybe boil through it .", "and be push the people around . so we be march right into the camp then , into Auschwitz , where we be tell we luggage would come later on and to be sure everything be mark with we name . and then , when we get there , be in , I guess , around noon or afternoon -- I do not know -- we be tell to undress and put the clothes in a neat pile so that we will find it for later on when we get through with it . that be the -- the reception in Auschwitz . Change of tape", "would you continue in Auschwitz ? fr : ok . well , -lsb- PAUSES for 5 seconds -rsb- after we undress there , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- we be -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- first of all lead into a area like a -- like a conveyor belt . it be barracks after barracks , just divide with hardly any separation . you go in there .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- the next area would be they would give you a pair of shoe , so-called shoe , which be a wooden sole with a canvas top over it . and you would get two rag about 12 by 12 as -- you would wrap they around you foot as -- as stocking . then the next area you would go , you would get two strip with a -- with a number on it , which would be you prison number . and then the next -- the next area , there would somebody stand and grab you arm and put you -- tattoo you number on you . INT : can you display you tattoo for the camera ?", "they would give you a needle and some thread , and you would put you number also on you jacket and you pants . and now this whole procedure like I describe it to you take two night and three day . you would be stand there naked more or less all the time , in the fall and up in Auschwitz , where it get quite cold too . and -- -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- but no food . nobody would care .", "and what happen to I after a few month be in Birkeanu , they -- it be a Sunday , and they take we from Auschwitz Birkenau in appell . and I be -- that -- take out , too , and we put in -- in a barrack . and we all naked , strip naked completely . and what we wait -- we be wait for somebody to come , ss , to check we out . and at the evening it be -- come a few ss , and they have Dr. Mengele .", "and it be wintertime , as I tell you . we come in , and the uniform what we get , they do not give we at that time when we take shower . we have to walk about a 1/2 a mile on the snow , naked , to go and get the uniform . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- this be the way they treat we . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb-", "and we find there something , a place . there be s -- pilot -- you -- pilot ' jacket . we strip all the insignia from the pilot -- what it say . and we -- I get a picture of that . I show you that picture .", "so we be push into the camp , we be tell to jump off . they have a big shower there in the processing room . we be -- at one end we be strip all the way down , get a medically -- so-called medically , whatever it be -- get a shower . actually it be the other way around . and get prison clothes .", "ms : yeah , when we be in the camp . INT : and you be then send directly to shower , be that correct ? ms : then we be into the processing room , where we be strip . INT : do you remember any of the commandant , they name ? ms : no , but another interesting thing in that process .", "they be just push in a bag . and when we get out we get that bag back . there be -- and all we have , what we could take along -- we be stark naked -- be whatever we could put it we handkerchief and carry alongside , like a little bit of money and -- INT : so who examine you ? you say you undergo a medical examination ?", "ms : on the clothing , yeah . INT : what do the uniform look like ? ms : it be a prison strip blue and white . it be winter and they do not have enough prison uniform . in Dachau they have summer uniform and winter uniform .", "I come to they . of course , everybody be alert . everybody -- nobody undress , nobody go to sleep . everybody know . it be so funny .", "and -- and -- and the clothes be so warm , still . just from the dead , because they be take the same thing at the first pogrom . undress naked . this be why I -- my sleepless night , because suddenly everything be so graphic . suddenly I see and I hear , you know ?", "and -- and -- and woman , man , child . at that time , and in those day , you be especially , very modest , you know ? to run naked and -- and -- and then child cry , and baby . you know / and you have to jump , yet , in the grave , and then be shoot . which -- which again , I know exactly .", "I know , I know because I will tell you later , again , when we get to it , how I know . I see it with my two eye , anyway . so they undress naked , leave the clothes behind , because they better make use of it , the Germans , and jump with you child . to see you own child jump . yes , jump , not just stand and shoot I .", "ml : no , no , no , no . not yet , no . oh yeah , I want to be , one day , one day , when the war will end , we will go into a bed , undress . not in you clothes . because we always sleep in they .", "because we always sleep in they . even the -- you take off you shoe , they be sit just that you be ready to slip in . this be the greatest dream , to undress , go into a bed , and sleep . that be a -- that be a dream not easily to be materialize . I mean , how ?", "INT : you have this dream often ? ml : oh , the -- the -- yeah . this , oh , to undress . you just want to take you clothes off and lie down . and maybe even sleep and forget about the whole world .", "then the each individual army have they -- excuse I -- they signal corps . when they come -- excuse I -- come to camp or something , they take picture with it . then I have this one -- I remember one be do by a , a german amateur movie guy who -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- show the , the way the prisoner be receive at a concentration camp -- how they be -- the woman be pull naked by they hair and so forth and so on . you have see these little still that I have of there -- of they . that be another one .", "and in fact , he help hundred , if not thousand , of refugee out of southern France and Germany to get out of they , out of they country . and this be a picture actually take out of a movie . and in the movie strip , he show that he do not want to give the Hitler salute , so he just wave he hand up and down and up and down . and it look really funny . this be , again , from that Hoffmann file .", "which we know what it mean -- nothing . they shave we . they -- we have to undress . and we be usher into a shower , to take a shower . and we get these dutch clog for we foot , and a cotton uniform , blue and gray striped , with a number on the uniform .", "and that be about it . and the pants be on we . INT : so unlike the woman , who be completely naked . LA : only , only one time they ask we to push down the pants . but no , we , we -- generally we be half naked , just half naked when the inspection come .", "INT : so unlike the woman , who be completely naked . LA : only , only one time they ask we to push down the pants . but no , we , we -- generally we be half naked , just half naked when the inspection come . they tell we to take off we coat . INT : ok .", "anyway , when it come -- I think it be -- it be a very bad winter . they use to -- we have to take a shower every -- every two week . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- we have to go naked , in the winter , from the barrack , to go to the shower -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and back , also . it do not make any difference how deep the snow be or how cold it be . and by God -- and for God 's name , nobody ever get a cold there from that .", "and what I remember , what he do -- he take a big linen . he dunk it in some kind of fat or something . I do not know , because when -- he undress I and cover I , and roll I in , in this particular sheet of this warm oil , or maybe -- I do not know what it be . and I lay there . he feed I .", "I remember watch , that there be some kind of a counter there in the middle when we go through after we be separate . and I guess , I do not know , we be change and -- and -- and dress , how -- how -- I remember this one German . and this woman be naked naturally -- how he make she bend over that counter , whatever it be , and take the poke and poke she in she butt and have somebody look into she butt to see whether she have some jewelry inside she rectum . -lsb- pause for 7 seconds -rsb- and how they go around and look at everybody . and some of we be shave , some of we be not .", "I -- I manage to get myself out of that -- of that place . I be not there . and we -- they take we out on the platform , naked , and we stand there for 24 hour , naked on the platform . evidently , what might have happen , they have no specify place for we . evidently , what happen be that maybe Mengele be not there .", "evidently , what happen be that maybe Mengele be not there . evidently , what happen , they have no -- they have no design what to do with we . because we stand there naked for 24 hour on the platform -- just the woman . and we be lucky . it be summertime .", "no fool around . and so you soap yourself in as fast as you could , and then they wash you off , ok . so you come out , naked , as you be . they -- after that , they have you stand outside . it be cold .", "and he -lsb- background noise -rsb- use to have a farm not too far from the -- from the cemetery , and he know the , the , you know , the territory . and he jump over the fence . they be all , all undress on the -- on the cemetery . all the Jews be undress to be kill . and he jump a fence , and he run away from it -- from the cemetery .", "and he jump over the fence . they be all , all undress on the -- on the cemetery . all the Jews be undress to be kill . and he jump a fence , and he run away from it -- from the cemetery . he be the only one to run away .", "and they , they tell we to get ready . we be go to march out . we know it be something come , because the airfield we be work on be strip by american plane . and we be so happy to see it . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- the german guard , they be hide .", "they just -- the only thing I remember when we be in the Sonder 's study , first day , Sonderkommando , I see about 25 or 3,000 people come in . you know . they be put they -- you know , they -- undress , go there . and the only -- one thing I remember that always the ss be say be take you shoe and -lsb- non-english -rsb- . you know , put they together as a pair , and take it in you hand .", "we -- mostly , he will come about 1:00 , 2:00 in the morning . and we know that behind that be a transport . because they put the railroad car on the step of the -- of the -- where the chamber to undress be . you be just in the crematorium . it be not -- from -- direct , you know .", "nobody could come close . so . INT : in you previous description , you describe the undress room , and the gas chamber be below ground . dg : yeah . INT : and could you just describe to I what be above ground , what you -- what you see physically , the building that be there ?", "and they give you -- the -- the thing be that the -- the sonderkommando , you know , they have always better delivery of -- of thing than the regular one , because everybody come , always they bring a few case or a few box of food . and the Germans , they do not care . you can have anything you want , and anything , undress like this . so we have that . that be ok .", "that be all . INT : so once this have be announce , do you go to you station to wait , or how do you anticipate what be go to happen ? dg : well , they know what time be come and we be ready in the undress room , and wherever we have to do . and go , actually , we be very , you know , to see that everybody go into the gas chamber , too . INT : so can you describe to I what happen when the victim come in ?", "would they have any awareness of where they be and what be happen ? dg : no , you can not tell anything to anyone . just undress fast enough . and you be -- you be there to help they undress , to get undressed . they do not take too long to undress .", "dg : no , you can not tell anything to anyone . just undress fast enough . and you be -- you be there to help they undress , to get undressed . they do not take too long to undress . and then they be get in line and go to -- when you get into the gas chamber , then a lot of people , they be not all stupid , you know .", "just undress fast enough . and you be -- you be there to help they undress , to get undressed . they do not take too long to undress . and then they be get in line and go to -- when you get into the gas chamber , then a lot of people , they be not all stupid , you know . they -- they be see what it be , that no -- no water come or anything .", "so it take a while . but after they close the door , they know that that be the end of they . INT : so as the victim come into the undress room , can you describe to I the atmosphere in that room ? dg : well , everybody -- the atmosphere be very tense . the people , they could not -- you could not tell they what be go to happen , but they be think themselves .", "and I think they be think that -- that they life be end , you know . so you could go there in the crematorium , you -lsb- inaudible -rsb- be the end of you . INT : who be inform they about the process of undress ? who be tell they that they have to undress ? dg : the -- we be tell they .", "so you could go there in the crematorium , you -lsb- inaudible -rsb- be the end of you . INT : who be inform they about the process of undress ? who be tell they that they have to undress ? dg : the -- we be tell they . there be a couple of german there , but we be the one to tell undress , take out everything , you know .", "who be tell they that they have to undress ? dg : the -- we be tell they . there be a couple of german there , but we be the one to tell undress , take out everything , you know . and you know , also , people be very distressed to find they be nude , you know , especially the woman . INT : and how do they display that distress ?", "and I observe , and they be confuse . and you could not tell they anything . INT : do some people refuse to undress ? dg : no , I do not -- I do not -- I do not see anyone . the only thing I see sometimes be some friend of ours that they come in .", "and he tell he , oh , you shit , something like that , you know , in German . everything go through . INT : so you do have from time to time a german officer in there during the undress procedure ? dg : oh , yeah . INT : and be he give order , or be he --", "but we have to do -- you know , everybody 's complain about we job , you know . all the -- if you can talk to survivor , they always will be against we . INT : once people have undress , who give the instruction for they to go into the gas chamber , and how do that procedure take place ? dg : they tell you -- they do not tell you much . go into a line , and they start bring they in .", "they could not put it back in another . everything be very specific with they number , you know . INT : so if I be -- if I be hear you correctly , only the number of people that could fit into the gas chamber be allow into the undress room . dg : oh , yeah , yeah . they -- they know how many .", "they never bring thing except when really they -- they think it be necessary . and that be when -- and they accommodate . INT : can you describe for I the scene in the undress room once everybody be inside the gas chamber ? what do it look like at that point ? dg : the undress room ?", "INT : can you describe for I the scene in the undress room once everybody be inside the gas chamber ? what do it look like at that point ? dg : the undress room ? -lsb- chuckle -rsb- you have to pick up -- we have to pick up everything . everything go to Germany or wherever it be , or .", "I think they use to put it in truck or whatever it be . they do not -- they be pretty organize . INT : and would you be involve in clear the clothes from the undress room in one of you role ? dg : I do not do it , but they do it . INT : they be other sonderkommando ?", "the German come in , give he a shot , and boom , I be finish , you know . they be very -- the Germans be very good at execute people . INT : so just to clarify , you be say that there be one or two time when there be a small child in the undress area ? dg : no , no . that be in the -- the gas chamber .", "dg : no , no . that be in the -- the gas chamber . the undress area , no . INT : so on a -- on a very rare occasion , a child might survive the gassing . dg : yeah .", "dg : they only one I know about that be Moll , I think -- Otto Moll . Otto Moll be a very , very -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- sadistic man . and he will -- when they be come in , you know , they would pick up about 20 young girl , you know , and just undress they , and try to shoot they in the -- in the -- in the place , you know , what they call they -- just the breast , and here . so that be Moll . so always from -- he be the guy bring the people to -- to the ramp .", "the people dehumanize . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- it be -- I say , I can not believe . we go -- we go -- we be strip of everything we be wear . we be take . we head be shave off .", "my mother say , take he . I give he my hand and I grab he and I take he up , and the train start to move . my mother undress he from top to bottom , throw out all he clothes , and everybody give he something . I give he trousers . I do not know what I have trousers , extra trousers .", "and they would harass you . and they would -- it be just a constant harassment with -- with beating . and take they off to this horrible place to -- to strip they , and beat they , and search they , and question they . and then they would send people to take the money . if you be go to pay so much and so much , you can buy freedom .", "and she come back , maybe , about five , six day later . we would go there every day , and stand there by the Kripo . and I think , for about a week , or maybe longer , she -- she just do not even want to undress . she be just completely out of she mind . because what they want from she be to find out from she where do we hide the -- the jewelery and money ?", "so I be in , in prison . and after a few day , Jan -- yeah , no , there be one episode I must say . when I be take to the prison , ev-everybody be strip and check . I have a blouse . and here be a little pocket .", "and I have with I a picture of my mother . and I fold it and put it in that pocket . and when it be my turn to strip , then I take off the blouse already so the woman who do the search , she do not notice that I have a picture in my pocket . so this picture be with I . after a few day , I be , in evening , I be stand in the door of we cell .", "it have number with hook , and also a lot of bench . the Germans be tell they not to forget they number , because when they come out , they can find they place . they undress . and next to a hallway , there be the gas chamber . the gas chamber hold 2,500 people , because this be one of the largest one .", "and we have little ash on we own bury in that particular place which come from Vistula River . I do not know exactly how you spell it . INT : do the Sonderkommando , be they be with these people when they first go into the undress chamber ? MK : I do not think so . if they be , maybe just a few get special -- some signia or band that they can go in .", "we wear civilian clothes . I do not wear the clothes with the line . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- but some of they be involve , not to the gas chamber , but where they undress . many time , it get over-warm in May . when the transport come , they do not give they a chance .", "many time , it get over-warm in May . when the transport come , they do not give they a chance . they undress they upstairs in the yard . then they do not observe anymore separate man and woman . they be so in a hurry that they undress they on the top , because the clothes be not take out .", "they undress they upstairs in the yard . then they do not observe anymore separate man and woman . they be so in a hurry that they undress they on the top , because the clothes be not take out . INT : do any of the people who come in realize what be happen and try to get away ? MK : nobody get away .", "this be the worst part -- when they start bring in prisoner , when you know some of they , and they gas those people , this be bad . and also , they use to have women ' selection . and they bring they in bare naked on the truck . and they open up the truck . and they dump they like a coal wagon .", "or shall I sell it and we will find a completely new home . oh no , I say , I have always want to live here . so we virtually strip the house and rebuild the inside . and it be -- INT : again , and when do -- what be the date that you get marry ?", "and I come there . there be a line . you undress yourself . 100 , maybe 200 , go one , two , three . a doctor or a officer come there .", "in my case , I will tell you what happen . they take we in , in a room of 10 , 15 . and in that the room undress , to be undressed . everyone 's undress . I have in front of I a dog tag which I show you before and I be go to show you later on -- a dog tag , which I do get -- which I do get in a labor camp , I be a exceptional .", "they take we in , in a room of 10 , 15 . and in that the room undress , to be undressed . everyone 's undress . I have in front of I a dog tag which I show you before and I be go to show you later on -- a dog tag , which I do get -- which I do get in a labor camp , I be a exceptional . and I do not think of the dog tag .", "they shave we in Auschwitz , some of they . so they come . and you know barber have a machine and put in you head here in the middle , a strip . Cut it off in the machine . this be every three , four week .", "nothing will happen . however , I want you to think and realize you can not survive three minute without hope . so for we and later on , and from the beginning , I still say like the Nazis strip we but from everything . the only thing what the Nazis do not succeed , they could not take away from we hope and faith . because of hope and faith , we be go on from day to day .", "but then , towards the end of the day , they come to order . and we be bring to a barrack . in this barrack , we be order to undress completely , put everything on this side . and we be bring from this room , naked , in one next room , next barrack . and this be a shock that we will never recover from it , because in this barrack , they be the nazi man in the uniform .", "and we be bring to a barrack . in this barrack , we be order to undress completely , put everything on this side . and we be bring from this room , naked , in one next room , next barrack . and this be a shock that we will never recover from it , because in this barrack , they be the nazi man in the uniform . and there be even the -- the collaborator in the black uniform .", "and we be over there . he do , you know , some selection while we be count the roll call in the morning . this be not , you know -- it sound better than it be , because this be simply torture , to be almost naked . October , November -- it be bitter cold . and we have to be naked , strip , only the wooden shoe on we foot .", "this be not , you know -- it sound better than it be , because this be simply torture , to be almost naked . October , November -- it be bitter cold . and we have to be naked , strip , only the wooden shoe on we foot . and we have to be at the roll call in front of the barrack . INT : every morning ?", "INT : every morning ? hb : yes . INT : always naked ? hb : almost . yes .", "and you know it be just a matter of time , and Mengele use to come in for inspection , selection , right into the barracks every few week . you have to get rid of the sick one , the weak one who can not perform anymore to make room for the new one . we have to undress ourselves naked , stark naked in the barracks . and we have to stay before he . we have to turn around and stoop over .", "I remember I could see the machine gun be fly -- they be -- there be fly all over bullet , all over I . I do not know how I do not get hit . and I be , believe or not , naked . all I have be my shorts . and we see the wood be right -- take to the wood .", "crucify ? -rsb- themselves . we look like people from Mars , naked and here 's bitter cold outside . and fortunately , we could communicate , because Czech and -- and Polish be very similar . so we communicate .", "I play a lot . I play with doll . I think I be a very imaginative little girl because even I remember play with doll , it be not just dress and undress . but I would always imagine myself on a desert island , you know , or all kind of unlikely situation , and make up story about it . I have some very good girlfriend .", "the extermination camp where the jewish -- where the Jews from Warsaw go be call Treblinka , T-R-E-B-L-I-N-K-A , which be just -- I do not know -- a couple hundred mile or less east of Warsaw . and when they get there , as we later learn , some young healthy man would be pick to actually work temporarily in the camp . and the rest of the people would be unloaded and take to the shower and tell to undress and gas . and this information filter back . and when it do , of course , then nobody be willing to go anymore .", "I , for example -- in the camp , there be a big sort of a -- I do not know if you call it a bathroom . I guess a washroom , you would call it -- a row of sink , a row of latrine , all in view . a few people , of whom I be one , who would go in the morning , in the worst weather , and strip and wash , so I guess I must have have a towel or something to dry with . and all of a sudden , you know , there be a bathroom . it take I month to be able to use the bathroom alone .", "so they march we to the shower , tell we to take all of we clothing off , that we would pick it up on the other side . they would fumigate it . we stand naked for a long time in a snake-like line . and I remember when I reach the end of that line and could see , there be a long , narrow room with mirror on both side , and chair standing in front of these mirror . behind each mirror be a inmate , a jewish female in a uniform .", "then we would go out , stand at attention , be count . in between , they would do lineup and segregation , perpetually select people for gas chamber , every single day . we would have to stand naked . it be cold by then , rain , mud , barefoot . -lsb- pause for 6 seconds -rsb- around four in the afternoon they would bring in another garbage can full of what be call soup .", "the ground be hard . if it thaw , we have muck . we would strip off we clothes -- we dress . I mean , there be no other clothing -- and stand under that water and wash ourselves to prevent disease . because by then , the lice have come with everybody from Auschwitz .", "they use to bring jew from -- who be hide on Aryan papers in Krakow , and they catch they . so they use to bring they and the child , and they be kill they . they have to undress , put down they clothes on the ground , and jump to that grave . so we see those action almost every day , how they be kill because they be hide , they run away from camp , or the family give they out , polish family and so on . so this we be face with .", "and we know that we be go to the oven . we be be burn . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- and -lsb- sigh -rsb- then they tell we to strip completely naked . and they give we haircut . I do not recall if they shave we head , or they get very short hair .", "we be stay always together . Mengele pull out my sister to go to the oven , because he find a pimple on she neck , or this , or maybe she be too young . INT : be everyone naked during these inspection ? hs : I -- no . we be ready to get to the train , so he pull -- must have pull she out because she -- she look young .", "there be quite a few people be hang . people be -- when people do not work very hard , after the work hour they set up table . and some of the people be take out from the lineup and order to strip from waist down , lay on the table . and the ss people use too -- have whip and use to beat they . and they use to have to count they 25 .", "and they treat we less than human . they take we , first -- right away -- to a barrack . they strip we . whatever we have , we leave in one spot . they take we to another barrack .", "they be smart bastard . when I say that , you know , they be not kill we , which they really be not , other than the beating that would kill you eventually , they kill we when they feel there be a reason for it . and the one that I do remember be when three guy whose boot have wear out and it be winter time , and they take a blanket from a dead man and cut it into strip and wrap it around they foot and to go to work . and the Germans call that sabotage , you know , destroy german property , so they hang they . and the rest of we have to stand there for a extra hour and watch they be hang , and then watch they dangle in the wind .", "GK : No . I hear the first time of Schindler when we -- when they bring the people from this factory back to we camp . and we help to undress they and to give they another type of clothes . and I meet my friend from Przemysl from school that I go with she all through school . and she come from this factory .", "INT : do they shave you head ? RF : later . we come out naked on the other side of the shower room and stand there wet , naked from mid afternoon until about midnight . I remember my sister and I hug each other for a little body warmth . we be freezing .", "they spray we with ddt , with pesticide . and then we walk through a door where two prisoner greet we . one give we a recycled dress , which we put on we naked body . and another prison have a bucket of yellow paint and a brush about four inch wide and paint a yellow streak from the top of we shave head down to we back . this be the identification of be a jewish prisoner and that be how we enter the campsite .", "and another prison have a bucket of yellow paint and a brush about four inch wide and paint a yellow streak from the top of we shave head down to we back . this be the identification of be a jewish prisoner and that be how we enter the campsite . INT : and down you naked back or on the dress ? RF : on the dress , through the dress . I remember the dress stick to my body .", "and she say to I , ` he be ask for you . ' and I look over there and this officer be wave to I . now , you must understand we be totally naked . I still have my hair , my blonde hair . and I turn away pretend that I do not notice , do not see .", "and this friend again say to I , ` you better go over there . ' I will never forget . you know I come from a family where my father I do not think ever see I in my slip , not naked . and here I be stand , how am I go to go over there ? so I cross my arm .", "you want to rinse you dress out , or you want to wash you face , or you want to have a drink of water , or you want to go to the bathroom . and the nazi soldier , stand around laugh at we . make fun of the woman sit down on the bathroom , or stand naked , wash themselves . I only known that this humiliation remain with I forever . I be embarrass when I see somebody be embarrass .", "I feel for they . this be the kind of humiliation that destroy you humanness . you just feel totally naked , totally vulnerable . you know . every time you go in there you know that have the power to do anything they want to do with you .", "it be pour rain that day . icy water . and so they take we to this shower , and then they hold we outside , naked . and we stand there from morning appell until about 4 o'clock in the afternoon , in that icy rain . and that be when the second miracle happen .", "so , then they take the last piece of clothing off my -- we body , and we walk into a room , which be the shower room . we never come back into the dress room . naked -- in wind -- in windy , cold weather like this , we walk out naked on the other side of the bath house , and we stand there from about mid afternoon till -- till approximately midnight . it be indescribable , the pain , the fear , the hunger . and you know , today I be here exactly 50 year -- we be go to commemorate , today , the -- the liberation of this camp .", "in these big oven , they be disinfect the clothes . not we clothes , because we never change clothes here . but when they kill the people , then they strip they and , of course , they disinfect they clothes . or , if prisoner from the camp be kill , or -- or have to go away , this be where they bring to disinfect the clothes . by the way , I want you to know that this place be fill with lice .", "and that be why this be where they bring all we belongings once we be go . and this also be a place of horror . on the two side there be two shower room where the prisoner be bring and take a shower , and then , we -- naked , we be dispose of on -- on the side of the bath house . there be a space -- when we go out , I will show you -- which be a barrack at one time . and then we go in there , and they shave we head , and they spray we with ddt , and then finally , they give we a piece of rag , which be disinfect here .", "how can I show you what it look like ? thousand of woman with shave head . we look like comic strip . I remember , I could not find my sister . once we get out of here , I could not find my sister , could not recognize she .", "and from that dress room , once we leave all we belongings , they tell we to be very neat , and to fold we belongings very neatly , and leave it in a pile so that when we come back we can remember exactly where we clothing be . needless to say , we walk into the shower room and everything be take away . and we walk out totally stark naked . and it be -- it be just hard to remember . it be hard to believe that it happen .", "or if you change from one camp to another , you come into the bath house again . they re-shave you head , disinfect you and you clothing . I remember just before we leave Auschwitz we stand out there naked , wait for we clothes to be finish so we can get on we death march . but just , as I say before , just every corner here , -lsb- sigh -rsb- you can sense -- you can sense death . you can sense destruction , evil -- just a evil place .", "he get sick , and he go into the hospital . and there every month we use to have a selection . selection mean you get undressed and you stay naked completely outside , and a german doctor will come in . he will do with he finger this way and the finger that way . if the finger that way be to -- back to work , and the other finger be to the crematorium .", "they catch another couple from my town . and then they catch another couple from Zlocz\u00f3w , older people . they take we all into Zlocz\u00f3w again , into the ghetto , and they tell we to undress . I be tie up . I do not have a belt , but I have a string .", "we know already , because I use to see they , what they use to do . every time they -- they take -- they catch the Jews , they put they against the wall . they make they undress , lie down . and they have machine gun , and they shoot they right in the back , you know , the lung or whatever . they go like this to each one , naked .", "they make they undress , lie down . and they have machine gun , and they shoot they right in the back , you know , the lung or whatever . they go like this to each one , naked . so we know already what be go on . we look at each other .", "it be very dark . I -- I go out and go back to the village . INT : you say you -- this -- be this before you undress , or ? JG : no , after . before .", "before . no . we -- we start to run before -- before we undress . like I -- I start to play around , you know , with the knot , with the string . instead of open up the belt to get undressed , I start to play around .", "and then what happen ? rw : well , then they be scream and yell . they take we into this place where they undress we , and they put a rag on we , and they take we hair off . INT : how -- what do you mean they take you -- they shave ? rw : they -- they -- they shave we head .", "and we stick together in Auschwitz -- actually , Birkenau , I think . that be what it be -- a part of Auschwitz . so when we get there , in two minute , you have to undress , you know . we do not know what be go on . we be naked there .", "so when we get there , in two minute , you have to undress , you know . we do not know what be go on . we be naked there . we stay in line , stay in line again , beat , get into the empty barrack . and finally , they make we go in , take a shower .", "you should not pack . you should offer passive -- you can not offer active resistance , but at least you should offer passive resistance . so what the -- what the majority of people do , they do not dress and they -- they stay naked . they stay naked . they do not pack anything .", "you should offer passive -- you can not offer active resistance , but at least you should offer passive resistance . so what the -- what the majority of people do , they do not dress and they -- they stay naked . they stay naked . they do not pack anything . and so the British make a announcement say , next day , everybody have to be pack .", "he take that away . a lot of stuff get steal , you know , by the way . some camera and valuable thing be steal , especially of those people who leave completely naked , because they leave everything behind . it be all gather up by some -- some Arab prisoner whom the British have assemble for this purpose . all the stuff be gather up in just heap and send off to -- to the ship .", "and I start crawl between the body . and I crawl to where the clothes be . INT : the prisoner , the people have to undress before they shoot they ? SW : absolutely . and I do not know whether I be alive or death .", "you know what that mean ? INT : tell I . DJ : that mean the lous -- louse on the strip because it be cut right in the middle , like this . by , by and inch , a inch and a half , a stripe . INT : on you uniform , be there any ident -- identify design or color ?", "there be no german man . there be just german woman there . the two lady -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- take I in , undress I , give I a hot bath , and give I food . and of course , the prisoner give I food and give I -- and start out drinking wine at that -- at that time , to help they drink wine . INT : and you be about 17 year old at that time ?", "and during the night , one of they also manage to get up . he be wound . and he come -- and they have to undress , so they come naked into the neighbor workshop . and of course , they give he -- they help he . so I be not the only one .", "you know . he turn around with the back to I so I should not see what he be do and -- anyway . next step , we be again , lead from the barracks into a -- what I would now call a sort of anteroom , ante-washroom , ante -- where we have to undress . now -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- at this moment , other inmate start shave we . all body hair and head , of course .", "and I say to my father , they do not need to do that if they be go to kill we . and behind we , a group of young woman come in laugh to -- to themselves . not take any notice of we , the scene of we , you know , a -- a -- a row of naked man mean nothing to they . and they have to take they luggage -- we belongings -- away and probably try to look through and -- or hand in the valuable . I be not sure how much have disappear and hopeful for the future .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- I leave . and ever there be a truth in the say , from the fire into the , from the frying pan into the fire , that be it . hardly have I enter my own barracks , I be tell to undress because the ss doctor just inspect the people there . already , there be a line already in front , go to another room which I have never enter because it be probably the private room of the block eldest , usually like a couple and mostly like a german criminal . and I have not , I have not tell you about it yet .", "I come across it . the name be Boga . and he -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- have a contraption in he office , the so-called Boga swing , where he strip prisoner , put they -- hang they up like a airplane , and with stick -- maybe on the body and often on the genitals -- hit they to make they fly . and the invitation give out for the nearby officer and lady , so-called lady , ss woman to come in and look at the performance . anyway , one such person speak to he .", "and this be tape number 12 . HW : probably the last . -lsb- laugh -rsb- anyway , I join a -- about a thousand youngster all naked and practically all muselmann on the way out . we clothes , we so-called pajama suit be take away . and whereas in previous camp I can not recall have have lice , but in this particular one , on the train , I have -- one of my main job be kill lice .", "when we finally leave Paris , there be a really emotional farewell to all we friend , and especially to this Leon Spitter who have help we so very much . and at the border from France to Spain , the German -- I guess at that point , they be ss really , not sr anymore -- do a body search . my mother and I be to put into one room and have a -- have to strip and have a very thorough body search for not smuggling anything out of the country . and at the end of it , I be still wear some rubber boot that I be wear because the weather be foul . and the ss man who be stand there with a whip , actually , confront I across the room about I have not take off my boot .", "en : well , no sooner be we occupy , the jewish population be immediately sequester from the rest of the population . every day , a new law regulation reign upon we . and we be strip of anything that would make life worthwhile . INT : what be some of these law ? EN : Pardon ?", "this be the last communication . and I now know that he be one victim of a mass execution . that be , at that time , the method of extermination , when they have to dig they own grave and strip and be mow down with machine gun . INT : and so it be -- be it around this time that you be deport or at least move ? en : around -- no , I be deport on April 1st , ' 42 .", "the sanitary condition be terrible . there be hardly any water , hardly any food . and we -- it take they three day to strip we whatever valuable we still have and to process we . and we be allow to have just a little suitcase . and finally , in the night , we be march to the train station .", "or do they have this unbelievable , incredible fate of be kill ? but we have little time to give it any thought because we be keep busy . we be strip to we skin . all we clothes be take away , and of course , all of we meager possession which we still have . I happen to have a watch of my father 's with I , which be a pocket watch and be very dear to I because it be -- do you want to stop now ?", "en : well , we -- I have to tell you first what happen during this disinfection . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- in this , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- what I say bath , or shower , or de-lousing station , everything that connect we with the past be lose . we be strip to we skin , and we be shave from head to toe . all we top hair , all we pubic hair , everything be shave , down to the toe . we have to undergo rectal examination because they suspect that we have some gold or jewelry hide there .", "and we be just wash down . there be no towel to dry up , and we be chase out into the cold . and stand naked , as we be , in assembly line , which be call the appel . and many , many hundred of time in the future , we have to stand in this kind of appel . it be a unbelievable , demeaning situation to be stark naked , because clothes somehow be a protection .", "and stand naked , as we be , in assembly line , which be call the appel . and many , many hundred of time in the future , we have to stand in this kind of appel . it be a unbelievable , demeaning situation to be stark naked , because clothes somehow be a protection . the physical assault be such that a lot of we just drop and fall , and be -- they be just remove . after hour of this ordeal , we finally be give filthy garb , which be the striped uniform of the prisoner .", "we be slave . that mean we have absolutely no law or recall of any kind in we favor . we be strip of any human dignity you can imagine . we be expose to the most sadistic , incredible indignity . we be beat .", "and it be physical and mental . it be terrible . I do not even think they be so short of food , as short of -- they strip they of anything human . these gypsy reverse they position and they become the boss over these gentleman , because it be only the few . and they really make they do thing which be not quite human .", "so that be when I be separate from my mother . and then I go -- go into Auschwitz itself . and we be straightaway strip , but do not know what be happen . we see the chimney . we smell , we think .", "there I get a assignment to do the braiding . but I could not go to the factory . so they would go to the factory , bring roll of long strip of fabric . and I would braid it lay in a bed . and they would bring it back to the factory .", "Rifkele 's in Israel . INT : so what be you experience in Auschwitz ? rs : we be march naked -lsb- sigh -rsb- after the hair be shave . and when we come in after the shower , a quick shower , and we be naked . and they give whatever -- there be a pile of clothing , and they give whatever .", "INT : so what be you experience in Auschwitz ? rs : we be march naked -lsb- sigh -rsb- after the hair be shave . and when we come in after the shower , a quick shower , and we be naked . and they give whatever -- there be a pile of clothing , and they give whatever . and they give I a long petticoat .", "I give she the long petticoat , and this cover -- that little baby-doll dress be good enough for I . because it cover I . but for the appell outside , we have to go naked . so they could see -- we could not hide anything . so that we still -- the bone there .", "we could not leave the barrack . there be bucket that quickly overflow at the doorway . and every night , they be stack up near the door , and usually the clothing be strip by other because there be a -- especially in the winter , there be such a shortage of clothing that a pair of sock or glove be very highly value . the -- at the end of -- each camp be surround -- each compartment be surround by -- by wire , barb wire . and there be the street , as I say , in the middle of a row of barracks .", "and we be very much afraid that we will all be gas . but then the order come that all the man that be capable of hard work should report for selection . and that be do primarily by Josef Mengele , that would -- people would strip and have to walk in front of he , and he would decide whether they be good candidate for -- for work . INT : be you part of that ? or --", "and -- INT : be this do during the day , or at -- mk : this be during the day , and we be -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- ask to strip in the same barrack that we be sort of during the day normally play . and have to -- I think we have to stand on a bench and he would look we over and decide sort of with a little whip whether we be ok or whether we should stay in the camp . and this happen -- we have to do that twice .", "AM : yeah . and two of those Russians get catch . and they be hang out by they hand on , on a pole overnight , just , just tie up like that , stark naked , all night . it be cold . how they do not freeze during the night , I do not know .", "we will , we will let you , and so on , which be kind of foolish . but even if he do not do it , he , he fate be , be write there , you know ? and I remember when he -- they take a few guy to undress he , wash he , and so on . and I , I see a tiny hole in he body . it be the first time I ever see a person with a hole in he body .", "you know , it be a , a cousin that make it through , and , and so on . and , like 2:00 in the morning , my aunt wake I up and drag I to the shower . I be stark naked . I , I , I sleep , at that time , in the raw . turn on the shower -- and then she tell I , you have a bad dream .", "EK : I think of gamble hall and casino . that be all I know . BERNARD KLAR : well , that be the only thing we ever know be the Strip and that be all . a lot of people be the same way . so we come out for one weekend .", "always somebody who crawl out from under . they have to go there . they have to undress in that cold , horrible thing , put all the clothes in one spot , line up against a trench and be machine gun down . not Germans , Latvians . Latvians be so clever .", "and in the morning , they walk they out again and they -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . there be picture , photograph of that . they be sit -- do you know those photograph where they be sit , sit naked ? those be people from my -- there be a girl from my class . she sit like that .", "do you have that ? this be somebody -- Jenny Brun . she sit like that , naked in the ice . and then at this point , we be leave only 800 Jews in town , mostly woman . and we then have to enter the ghetto .", "INT : separate from you ? mg : separate from I . and I get out from my line and tell my mother -- here we be , completely naked , no hair , no nothing . I say , mama , they will not recognize you anyway . go in the back of the line again .", "that you get like -- you be totally helpless . you do not -- and still you do not know what be ahead of you . INT : be there any feeling left of , of try to be modest and feel embarrassed to be naked in front of -- mg : I do not think so . INT : be there any feeling like that , or be there hopelessness ?", "you know , he do not want to leave Poland , and especially when he find out that the only place he can go when Gomulka come to power , he allow the Jews to leave Poland . but you could only leave for Israel . and at that time , when my parent finally decide to leave in 1956 , they be strip of they citizenship , and allow to migrate to Israel . I be actually the only one in the family who be not strip of they citizenship . because I be still roman Catholic .", "but you could only leave for Israel . and at that time , when my parent finally decide to leave in 1956 , they be strip of they citizenship , and allow to migrate to Israel . I be actually the only one in the family who be not strip of they citizenship . because I be still roman Catholic . so you can imagine the hypocrisy of -- of the communist world .", "check you ear , put down over there , everything 's -- no hiding -lsb- laugh -rsb- place . so they put I in the -- in a -- in a place like this . you stay just dark and stay naked . they take you out , and somebody check you . put in a finger here , put a finger here , put a finger in the back , in the ass .", "they take I over there . and there be big thing with water , like this . they put I in the water , two woman , naked . and with big brush , they brush off the louse . I get so many louse .", "and they find out he be a mechanic and I be a skilled mechanic helper . and then they take we to -- out to the Auschwitz camp . and before they take we to camp , we have to -- they strip we clothes and all we possession . and that be the last time I ever see any of my clothes or possession . INT : and what do they replace it with ?", "cs : and there be little room like it look like horse be stand there . and they start say , take off the -- the dress , take of the -- first the shoe with the stocking , then the dress , then the bra , then the pants until we come on the other side be stay german laugh . maybe you see it in Majdanek , people , every one of we walk out this way because we be naked . and they give we to drink a sweet coffee . it be so sweet probably I do not see it while the war be on .", "that mean you be you brother 's keeper . if somebody run away next to you , you be responsible . so they hang four girl , and we stay for two day like this and watch they hang naked . this be the worst thing in we life . and they take we out for walk sometimes .", "the sun be shine on we in the hot close -- there be very little oxygen . extremely hot . I know we all strip to the waist , take off everything -- shirt . and even then , we have difficulty get air . the older people pass out .", "cologne ? -rsb- and boot . and they say , -lsb- speak german -rsb- , everybody naked , out from the bed . stand to attention on the wall . so everybody have to stand to attention .", "and by about 8:00 pm or 9:00 pm , under four hour stand in the bitter cold , we get into the -- into the disinfection room , which be just a concrete -- concrete floor , basically , with six water , you know , thing run . and take everything off , of course , usually . just -- just before I get to the room , to we amazement , we could see the people who come out on the other side of the -- of the shower room -- naked , of course . they come out naked , and hot -- hot , steamy body . and there be a group of people who be stand there for hour and hour outside , naked , with they hot body .", "and take everything off , of course , usually . just -- just before I get to the room , to we amazement , we could see the people who come out on the other side of the -- of the shower room -- naked , of course . they come out naked , and hot -- hot , steamy body . and there be a group of people who be stand there for hour and hour outside , naked , with they hot body . and gradually , they fall down , and freeze to death .", "just -- just before I get to the room , to we amazement , we could see the people who come out on the other side of the -- of the shower room -- naked , of course . they come out naked , and hot -- hot , steamy body . and there be a group of people who be stand there for hour and hour outside , naked , with they hot body . and gradually , they fall down , and freeze to death . and so we think this -- this look pretty grim , because we get we shower , then we have to stand outside in minus 20 with -- with steam hot body .", "and then , eventually , we get underpants and singlet . and then we have to go outside . so we be not stark naked . we have underpants and singlet . I remember that .", "from whatever you eat , you have diarrhea . so they call in team of doctor . even before they give we -- and we be all naked , of course . in the camp , in the barracks , we be naked , because everybody be full cover with excreta , so everybody throw away these striped uniform . so I be naked .", "so they call in team of doctor . even before they give we -- and we be all naked , of course . in the camp , in the barracks , we be naked , because everybody be full cover with excreta , so everybody throw away these striped uniform . so I be naked . eventually , I manage to get a singlet .", "even before they give we -- and we be all naked , of course . in the camp , in the barracks , we be naked , because everybody be full cover with excreta , so everybody throw away these striped uniform . so I be naked . eventually , I manage to get a singlet . I manage to be -- I remember one little episode in the -- in this emergency hospital -- a school , I mean .", "and look at all these -- because he be in love with one of the -- what be he name ? nurse . so for he it be very embarrassing to see a naked man parading . so I say , you give I a trouser , I will put it on . -lsb- laugh -rsb- I have not get one .", "sr : that be the only thing we be able to keep , yes . that be the only thing . so we be actually naked with we shoe on and no hair . lucky there be no mirror . only we see each other , and we could imagine what we look like .", "that be where they gas they . so this room which be before that gas room , we have to take they clothes out , take they back to where these huge mountain of clothes and all sort of thing be , and -lsb- inaudible -rsb- , and put they back there . INT : when the prisoner go into this undress room , be you there with they ? sr : no . only the ss be in there .", "and the ss be stand in front of it . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- I suppose maybe there be a -- another one on the other side . INT : how soon after the prisoner go into the shower do you and the other go into the undress room ? sr : well , we really do not know because we do not know exactly when they go in . transport be come -- transport , long line .", "and it be a terrible , terrible smell all over in the -- in the lager and in -- in we block and all over . it be a terrible smell . INT : in the undress room , be there any smell there from the shower room ? sr : no . no .", "many time we be call out , we have -- and we have to take we clothes off . when something happen in the lager , like somebody want to escape , they call we out , and we have to take off we clothes . we have to stand naked in the bitter cold . and then , when they catch the person who try to escape , they be hang she in the middle of the lager , and we have to march and look at it . and while we be wait for that , the only way we be able to keep warm -- that we get together , and one body warm the other .", "-lsb- pause for 8 seconds -rsb- I never see child . I never see old people , even older people . INT : you have mention that you see the line of people wait to go into the undress room . be there old people and child then ? sr : yes .", "so we work be finish . then I be transfer to a place call the Weberei , where we use to do these -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- thing . they bring we some leather strip . we use to make ribbon out of they . and all sort of thing we be work there .", "I be go . and I leave they there . that be the day -- the night when they take we , undress we , take everything away from we , and they give we one piece of so-called dress -- a summer dress , the 1st of January -- and put we into wagon . we do not know where we be go . we do not know what will happen .", "and he be tell the first thing he should do where he arrive , wherever it be -- because they do not know -- as far as I know , he do not -- to go to the commandant and tell he that he be disabled . now can you imagine that ? of course , they would have -- as soon as they strip he of he clothes , they would have find out . there be no point in say that he could have be save . he could not .", "there must have be another transport , which be intermingled , and I do -- and all language be speak . and I tell you , we cling together -- the three of we -- very tight . and we be strip naked from the clothes we be wear and take into a room where they shave we , and I mean shave we everywhere -- we head , everywhere where there be hair , that be shaven . my mother be on my right . my sister be on my left , or vice versa .", "but one minute , you have get people next to you , and the next minute , you have get something which be suppose to be call a human being . well , it be not . I be sorry to be so vain , but when somebody go and shave you head completely and -- and you be naked , and the ss be run through like if there be piece of wood around , you lose a complete identity . you do not -- you -- you -- you stop be a human being . it have get something to do with the hair , yes .", "the thing what we have to do be take the dead body and put they on the pile , which there be pile like in a , in a , in a -- when you go in the wood and they have get , they have get cut wood , you know ? only this be disorganize . they be just sling across whichever way naked . it be terrible . and the stink be something awful .", "and they take we into the ss compound , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- which be clean and have bathroom and have bunk , but clean one . and that be where we be transport to in the very immediate future . all I want to say be , the minute I know that my mother be dead , when I walk around the camp -- and that be after the liberation , and the ss be strip . and they have to run with the dead body to put they somewhere . I do not know what they do with they at the time .", "and then in January 1945 be a appel . but during -- in 1944 , also , there be appel that they come , and they make selection . we have to undress , and a commission come about every three month . we have to stay and move away , you know , apart so the soldier can walk through , in between . and without shirt , they look if you still have some skin on you .", "everybody be look to go into the center . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- after this -- after a week , it be rain . and I remember they take we into the basement , and in the basement , they -- we have to undress everything . and we stand before a commission for the german with two couple . we have to stay like this .", "we stay in the -- to take a shower , we stay maybe 15 minute . it be ice cold . we stay naked until they come -- about 50 people -- and then everybody get -- not everybody . for two guy , one piece of soap , which be a square like a square of butter . this be for two guy .", "out through the door . not through the door -- to the window . we have to run out naked through the window where there be three foot of snow . we have to run through naked through the courtyard and stay in the -- on the step maybe a half hour till we get up on the second floor -- all naked in the winter till we get the new uniform with the stripe and the new wooden shoe . that be , they call , the -lsb- german -rsb- .", "not through the door -- to the window . we have to run out naked through the window where there be three foot of snow . we have to run through naked through the courtyard and stay in the -- on the step maybe a half hour till we get up on the second floor -- all naked in the winter till we get the new uniform with the stripe and the new wooden shoe . that be , they call , the -lsb- german -rsb- . the -lsb- inaudible -rsb- .", "and you could sweep away a shovel of flake every day from under my bed . it be itch so terrible . I be run out naked outside to freeze for the itch because it be itch so terrible . I do not know what to do with myself . finally , the american doctor and the german and the doctor from the camp , which be also polish , come with the military Red Cross van and they take I -- this be ambulance -- they take I to Erlangen Universitat Health Clinic -- university skin school .", "I go quite hysterical and very nasty on many occasion . and so I be there with all these woman . and then come the drill , which you know -- that strip naked . I with all my panties and my bra and all the -- jazz , which I take . I -- we have to get out of it .", "she say , I be Frau Irriza -- Irriza . my husband be a rabbi from Galina . he have never see I naked , and you will not see I naked either . so he hit she so hard . she strip faster than i. and she survive with we , with I .", "he have never see I naked , and you will not see I naked either . so he hit she so hard . she strip faster than i. and she survive with we , with I . and I visit she in Israel just before she die . and she have a daughter , Stella , who be with she .", "when you ask man , I do not see any man until the second night . the drill be like this . first , you go under the terrible shower with you shaven head -- a hot , hot boil shower on the naked head , then out in the snow . it be snow in October in Poland -- to dry . there be no towel by -- supply by the ss -- then in .", "and I hold my breath . and somebody promptly steal it . so I be full of shit , no paper , no underwear , stark naked . I sit there , and I think , I can handle everything . they can shout .", "what be this ? and I look at this pink triangle -- to make conversation , to get he to go away . I could not get up naked like that . and he say to I , I be gay . -lsb- non-english -rsb- .", "he know what can happen to I . I do not . and so next day , stark naked , parading , end of October -- it be so cold . by the hand , my sister -- and I be not tattoo . because I be in a transit camp from Birkenau straight into Auschwitz , where people go for labor .", "in other word , that be sort of a weed out process . we would -- they would bring people to we . and the first thing I would do be make they strip to the waist and check they left armpit -- -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- tattoo , leave armpit blood type , ss . anyone who have that , we send they to Frankfurt for further interrogation and so on . so I be the -- in the preliminary .", "then Mengele announce that he be gon na come . everybody have to come out and have to go -- that be the 1st of May . everybody have to go in naked . so they it take we out about 6 o'clock in the morning . the woman on one side of the appellplatz , the man on the other side .", "also , when we arrive in P\u0142aszow -- I forget this . when we arrive in P\u0142aszow , the first Yom Kipper , which be the holiest day , they line up 95 people in a open -- open ground . and they be lay completely naked , alive . and we go to Madrich . and they chase we fast , fast to go .", "it be in May . and Mengele -- Dr. Mengele from -- from Auschwitz come , with some other guy , and they have table set up . and we have stand there naked . all -- everybody be naked . and they have like file with paper .", "and Mengele -- Dr. Mengele from -- from Auschwitz come , with some other guy , and they have table set up . and we have stand there naked . all -- everybody be naked . and they have like file with paper . and everybody have to march down the aisle .", "ms : and then we be suppose to go to Brunnlitz . now , instead of take we to Brunnlitz , they take we to Auschwitz . and again , you know , we be like naked again . they give we wooden shoe like that . they be call Hollanders -- you know , they be like the Holland people wear .", "and they say -- like this . you know , they make like , a sign that we be very , very , in the wrong place . and then the next day , they take we to the -- to the -- to the zone there , to the -- to the bus , thing -- naked , of course . and we be -- there be all the people . all the people who be still be in Plaszow , we be all take there .", "otherwise , I would have be take there , too , already , in Auschwitz . and then , of course , you know , there be selection all the time in Auschwitz . they come into the barrack , and Mengele , and we be naked , and it be a terrible time , too . but at least , then , after three or four week , they come , and they call the name . now we be not number anymore .", "sh : no , we meet there . so when we come to the border , there be the Germans be stand there on guard . and then you have a strip of land , which they call no man 's land . and then you have the russian border . the Germans , they search you .", "but during the war , Russia -- Russia occupy it because they make a pact . the Germans come that far , and the russian -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . that be when they make the -- the strip of no man 's land . so when we -- be a little light , we start walk towards the railroad . when we come there , we wait I can not remember how long until the train come .", "they steal some straw . and they bring it , and they put it up by the wall . and whoever go to sleep first -- we never undress -- one next to the other . and that be how we live there , maybe for two week . maybe more , I do not remember exactly .", "she embrace my father for a long time . in the morning , she tell we what happen . when we leave , they be tell to undress , put you hair down , just in case she have something hide there . and the ukrainian dig grave to put 10 in 1 . they set they in line , 10 to each grave .", "so what I do , I have a -- in a place that I be clean up , and I put in some fresh earth like -- it be so low , about four foot . and I pack it with -- so I pull myself , and I push myself into this hole . and I remember I be lie on the right side , and I cover with my boot my naked foot , they should not see that I be there . and I just look like that with one eye , and I see my mother stand up . and she come in the front of the Germans just like that .", "say , do not wake he . and it be about 10 or 12 pair . if we would not have this here , we have to go naked . we bring this in . and this be so good .", "say , how you go to make a harness ? I say , hold it . let 's undress . we take of we -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . they be those , those -lsb- inaudible -rsb- thing .", "we take of we -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . they be those , those -lsb- inaudible -rsb- thing . and we undress completely naked . I take off my pants and my shirt . he take off he .", "so this group of younger , German , inexperienced soldier come to the house , and they ask for jewelry or some other valuable . we say that we already deliver accordingly to these -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- law and decree , but they still want this . and they want I and another person in this house to undress so they could examine the clothes . and then my future husband protest . he embarrass they in a way .", "and then my future husband protest . he embarrass they in a way . if I be german , -lsb- GERMAN -rsb- , pure race , how they dare to expect a young woman to undress , you know ? and they beat he up and split . so I be safe , and my wedding , my engagement ring , which be very important later .", "that be a painful question . and we have to think hard how to answer . but you be mostly -- not only we , but generally speak -- people be deprive of they possession , deprive of they family , be throw from one corner to another , one corner of the world to another , be humiliate , be strip of they clothes , shave of they hair , print number on -- tattoo number on you hand . and that be a person . and be in this spirit or close to it , how could you think of fight ?", "that be what we be tell . then they take we to the shul and also to the -- to the elementary school too . so that be the first time that my eye start to open up , because come the nighttime , you start to undress . you do not know if you should undress , you should not undress , and all these strange people . I mean , we be very shy , very family-oriented .", "then they take we to the shul and also to the -- to the elementary school too . so that be the first time that my eye start to open up , because come the nighttime , you start to undress . you do not know if you should undress , you should not undress , and all these strange people . I mean , we be very shy , very family-oriented . I mean , we be not like use to it , see naked man or naked -- thing like that .", "you do not know if you should undress , you should not undress , and all these strange people . I mean , we be very shy , very family-oriented . I mean , we be not like use to it , see naked man or naked -- thing like that . so when I see this man with he long -lsb- non-english -rsb- , I say , oh my god . I mean , what -- what be go to happen ?", "then they say , bend down . and they cut we -- cut we hair . so we feel like -- like naked without we hair . and they cut you at you vagina , all the hair , and even under you arm . so then they say , ok .", "and they cut you at you vagina , all the hair , and even under you arm . so then they say , ok . you go into this room and you undress . and make sure you put everything in one place so that you will know when you come out of the shower that that be yours . and take the stock out of the shoe .", "I be a -- so this lola who greet we that you be go to go through the chimney -- seem to I , even though she be polish , that she do understand hungarian , because she pick up my sister . at that time , they be select they and they have no clothes on they . they be naked . so she push she through the back door of the barrack and she throw a dress after she . meantime , I have to tell you , my dear Ellen , that we do not recognize each other after we get the clothes when they take away we own clothing .", "so she say she be freezing . she be freezing . so I go , I lay down naked . she lay on top of I . and my younger sister Elizabeth lay on top .", "whereas when we be in the lager , in the bunker , we get no food for a whole month . and one day , as we be stand Zahlappell , after Zahlappell I have notice that there be a big building next to it . and there be like a -- a basement , those strip of metal that give the air for the basement . and I see one little carrot hang there that get freeze to -- and as I lay down to get it , the whole metal enclosure , like the gate , just go in . so I fall into the basement .", "once in a while , we have to go to the bath , which be outside the camp . we have a german to come with we . and we have to undress in front of he in one room , walk to the shower naked . INT : be it just woman ? or ?", "matter of fact , it be the first time for year I be in a turkish bath , and I do not want to go out . and -- and the same time , the -- the man all leave , and I be sit there . all of a sudden , they let in about 40 people , naked people ! I do not think about girl . but naked people , they put they in .", "all of a sudden , they let in about 40 people , naked people ! I do not think about girl . but naked people , they put they in . and they start yell , scream . -lsb- laugh -rsb- so I get scare .", "every morning , they would put out the -- it be winter . it be cold -- they dead . naked . they be like -- like -- like -- like board . like board .", "it be October . it be icy cold . and then , really , to dehumanize we , naked , we have to -- to dry out , outside the shower , in -- in -- in -- on a -- on a -- on a parade ground . I would say we -- we stand there at least for six hour , freezing to death . and then they -- then , for some reason , they organize -- everybody get a blanket .", "and the next morning , again , they take we all out of the block . and , and besides we they have bring other people from other concentration camp -- from Buchenwald from Dachau , they all arrive more or less the same time . we have to go again across the appelplatz and again to undress . and then come Doctor Mengele . and , and , and just like , like in a meat house when they look -- first grade meat , second grade meat -- they look at everybody and literally , like this -- up and down .", "INT : yeah . fd : ok . and I say , I be in a hospital , and there be suddenly a air attack , and I -- the whole hospital go up in flame , and I -lsb- inaudible -rsb- naked , jump from the window , and some merciful german give I some clothes . and -- and I speak -- my French be better than that . let 's put it this way .", "from a human being , I turn into a number . that much , we could understand . and then to spite we , they demand that the whole transport , 1,200 people , have leave the wash room and be to stay -- stand on the outside all night naked . I remember at that time already , at least 20 to 30 people die because it be a cold winter night . it be October .", "that dark feeling , we all get . so after we get we number , they force we to stand and to -- to pass by . and they have the nerve -- we be 1,200 people in this transport -- to let we stay all night naked outside in four row . I remember it like yesterday . it be so cold .", "and the minute anybody even dare to get as close as five yard to the wire , they be shoot already . and still , so many time they be -- how you call this -- like flea at the -- at the -- where -- there be flea thing . strip . and flea get it . thus they be -- how do you say -- wait a minute -- let I think .", "and I say , I be in the hospital . the Germans bombard the hospital . I jump from the hospital naked and merciful german give I something to wear . thank God I make the story up , and here I be , and have the honor today to honor the -lsb- ? kiddushim , ? -rsb-", "they just take they out . that be how Mengele select they people , because that be what they do . if there be a blemish on somebody 's body , and many time we be there naked . he want to see we naked to make sure that , you know , there be -- there be no -- there be not go to be any -- any sickness . and if he find any blemish on anybody 's body , he take they out .", "that be how Mengele select they people , because that be what they do . if there be a blemish on somebody 's body , and many time we be there naked . he want to see we naked to make sure that , you know , there be -- there be no -- there be not go to be any -- any sickness . and if he find any blemish on anybody 's body , he take they out . and that be the end of they .", "and that be all I want . I do not want to have jewelry . I see people stop people on a -- german on the street and -- and strip they of they -- of they jewelry , of they ring and everything . I have no desire to do that . I just want to be clean .", "so I roll it up , very carefully , to sleep on it . it be a -- it be a stone floor that we be sleep on . and the next morning , they make we undress . they take we to the shower . and that be the end of we clothing .", "and the next day , like I say , they take we to the shower . no -- no water come out . but they make we undress . and we come in there . and we walk out of there .", "I think it be a pink square that they wear . and they have they number . they have strip clothing . they be very well dress . they be very -- they -- they -- they look good .", "EK : well , I find nothing be leave in we house . it be empty . everything be strip . nobody be live in there . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- some of the neighbor want to know how come we be not kill .", "-lsb- cry -rsb- so be my mother . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- they take they away from the sick bed and kill they in Auschwitz . -lsb- pause for 7 seconds -rsb- I can not picture my little cousin , and my mother , and grandmother , and grandfather undress before they take they into the gas chamber . -lsb- cry -rsb- I know that -lsb- sigh -rsb- I be in Washington to see the Holocaust memorial . we go through the memorial .", "and that time come maybe 10 people . and we be go , like , up the hill . -lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- and they tell the people to undress , and they shoot they . and we have to take the clothes back in on the wheelbarrow . and there be man and woman and child , you know .", "INT : absolutely . hb : I just want to mention -- when he arrive in Gross Rosen , we still have some -- we personal , personal thing with we . and when we arrive there , we have to undress and go through a bath , you know . and we come out from the other side . and down there , they give we , you know , different clothes .", "oh , so , my -- want to work . the other one do not want to work . I be go to give you all hiding -- strap with the -- with the leather strap -- 10 on naked bottom . they call ukrainian guard . and everyone have to pull the pants down , bend on the table , get 10 belt .", "I do it . but unfortunately , when I come to this Gross Rosen , they take away all we possession , all we clothing , give we the stripe suit . and after stand in shower -- cold shower , stand naked on the open street till evening , they load we on the train and take we luckily to Oskar Schindler . INT : how long be you in Gross Rosen ? LR : oh , just about 24 hour .", "but I understand that my brother be on the same transport , also come from the other camp to Auschwitz with the same transport . it be a huge transport , perhaps as many as 100 car . and then we be ask to walk forwards and undress . and we undress , and we come in front of a group of ss man . one of they be obviously the reign person , and he stand nonchalantly .", "it be a huge transport , perhaps as many as 100 car . and then we be ask to walk forwards and undress . and we undress , and we come in front of a group of ss man . one of they be obviously the reign person , and he stand nonchalantly . and we walk , five of we in front of he , naked as we be , take in some air to show some chest , try to look strong , rub we cheek with we fist , so that they will look pink .", "and we undress , and we come in front of a group of ss man . one of they be obviously the reign person , and he stand nonchalantly . and we walk , five of we in front of he , naked as we be , take in some air to show some chest , try to look strong , rub we cheek with we fist , so that they will look pink . try to stretch out , so we would not have such small behind . and he just mimic .", "oh , we have no more room . we can not take anybody on . there be 10 or 12 naked inmate already in the boat . and I be naked too , because I leave all my thing go . and suddenly , somebody yell out , this be we dentist .", "we can not take anybody on . there be 10 or 12 naked inmate already in the boat . and I be naked too , because I leave all my thing go . and suddenly , somebody yell out , this be we dentist . let 's take he .", "I think , he say , the owner of the bakery probably leave . but you may find at least something to house you . we be naked . it be 5 o'clock in the afternoon by the time I be in shore . we walk , and we see inmate on the shore , wash ashore dead .", "and he say , if you do not believe I , go outside and ask my friend . well , he be so convincing , and what else could we do ? we go naked as we be on the truck . and he drive we through the whole town of Neustadt . at 8:00 in the morning , by that time , naked , 70 , 80 , 90 people naked .", "we go naked as we be on the truck . and he drive we through the whole town of Neustadt . at 8:00 in the morning , by that time , naked , 70 , 80 , 90 people naked . we cover we private part with we hand as best as we could . and bring we to a hospital with white linen sheet , with white cover , and with normal people to address we .", "that familiar to you , Pawiak ? or maybe from -lsb- german -rsb- , that be the Gestapo prisoner . and they bring to Auschwitz , tell they undress , naked . there come a convoy , soldier with the rifle . he tell they , those people , to run in different direction .", "there be these lime shaft and we have to dig lime shaft . and God punish we on top of it . it be a severe winter of ' 45 , this be April ' 45 , and we be just stand there naked and barefoot with -- and deep -- deep shaft . and we have to dig out -- there be -- there be these rail car on top and there be different level and we have to load lime or -- or -- or -- this be just a tortuous thing . and from there to Dachau and from Dachau on the way to the Tyrols , there be specific order by Himmler to be shoot , all these inmate .", "it be a big -- tremendous big camp . we be delouse every once in a while . in the winter time , we have to go to the barrack that have the shower naked . we be chase out naked . we have to come back after a hot shower to the barrack naked .", "we be delouse every once in a while . in the winter time , we have to go to the barrack that have the shower naked . we be chase out naked . we have to come back after a hot shower to the barrack naked . I remember stand in one of the shower at the lousing -- delousing and my cousin I be with , he say to I , my god , look at yourself , just skin and bone .", "in the winter time , we have to go to the barrack that have the shower naked . we be chase out naked . we have to come back after a hot shower to the barrack naked . I remember stand in one of the shower at the lousing -- delousing and my cousin I be with , he say to I , my god , look at yourself , just skin and bone . I say , you be tell I .", "and I say , oh my god , he just -- he just fight with the other guy this morning . he try to escape . when they bring he , he be lay naked with bullet wound right here . and we all have to walk around it . it be not enough how they -- how they tortured we in this camp .", "and not until this morning , I do not pay attention , this be April the 13th , 1943 from Spaichingen , I be ship to Dachau . and at Dachau , I be put in in a barrack . there be hundred naked people in this one -- a lot of Russians , a lot of Russians prisoner -- a lot of russian prisoner of war . the lice be eat we up alive . it be like everything be move and everybody be cover with lice .", "it be absolutely terrible . INT : do you not say there be warm water ? CP : only at work , but I mean , you could not undress . you could wash you face , hair . but not any other area , because these man be come and go who work there .", "and I will give you a few example . people be lay in the street . when they die at home , family be put they out naked outside in order to not to report the death , so they could have they ration card . they use the ration card . not report they be also -lsb- inaudible -rsb- for the building , save the building for a quarantine .", "they empty out the whole -- the whole the -- the place , and they -- and they fix there a house for a -- for -- for -- for gassing . so they bring they in the winter , or in the summer , whenever it be . they undress . in one house , they undress . and they put in the bunker .", "so they bring they in the winter , or in the summer , whenever it be . they undress . in one house , they undress . and they put in the bunker . and then they gas they .", "but generally , he handle he . and I guess he bribe he too . because by the transport , by the shipment , when they finish , when they undress -- the kommando undress , we be by the oven . and he be the kapo . and after the undress , they -- they -- they chase he to the -- to the gas chamber .", "because by the transport , by the shipment , when they finish , when they undress -- the kommando undress , we be by the oven . and he be the kapo . and after the undress , they -- they -- they chase he to the -- to the gas chamber . they close the door . the knock -- they close the door and you could hear the knocking , knocking , knocking .", "but meanwhile , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- they do not buy it . it can not be , can not be . so -- but as the time go on , they -- they do not undress so fast . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and they start push with dog , dog . they see -- they see already that there be no other way .", "like I call it a lawn -- before you get into the crematorium , be a little lawn . but the lawn be , be fence around with , with , with little bush you should -- you should not be see through . and , and , and sometimes when transport come , if there be not place inside in the mortuary to undress -- because there -- there be not a mortuary in the undress room -- it be -- in 2 and 3 it be . so they tell they to undress on , on this lawn . so they take in the whole kommando and lay they out on the lawn .", "but the lawn be , be fence around with , with , with little bush you should -- you should not be see through . and , and , and sometimes when transport come , if there be not place inside in the mortuary to undress -- because there -- there be not a mortuary in the undress room -- it be -- in 2 and 3 it be . so they tell they to undress on , on this lawn . so they take in the whole kommando and lay they out on the lawn . they go from one to one and shoot they in the neck .", "and this time , I be not so fortunate . I get put in in the train back , just like the other people , with my husband , my cousin and he wife , and another cousin of mine . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- it be -- they undress we almost naked . so they -- so we could not hide anything . and they do not want we to jump from the train .", "and they do not want we to jump from the train . because when you have clothes and you jump from the train , it be easier for you to get away . but since they undress we , we could not run away . I -- at that -- at that time , I think I give up . I do not -- I could not take it anymore .", "AB : there be , like I would say , choose people , the one which they be choose to wear the blue armband . they could live a little longer . they job be to take out the people from the train and to take they to the main undress place . be outside , not inside . beside the woman , and the small child be lead to the barrack , very large barrack .", "be outside , not inside . beside the woman , and the small child be lead to the barrack , very large barrack . and the woman and the child , they undress over there . but the man , they undress themself all naked . and they be wait in group to be let in to the gas chamber .", "beside the woman , and the small child be lead to the barrack , very large barrack . and the woman and the child , they undress over there . but the man , they undress themself all naked . and they be wait in group to be let in to the gas chamber . INT : so what happen to you when you -- when the door open , what happen to you ?", "all of a sudden , they open up the door . we have no chance to even to say goodbye to each other . and when we go to that place , very big place , we undress ourself . I always think -- there come a order to take out a few people , about six , seven people . and one of mine relative , he know a man from Warsaw which be wear the red band .", "AB : they -- what they do , they prepare the people to the gas chamber . they -lsb- inaudible -rsb- they . they give they order how to undress , what to do with they clothes , what to do with they shoe , with the -- with the belong , like gold , silver , other thing . that be they job . so one of my relative know this guy .", "INT : can you describe the physical layout of Treblinka where you be ? AB : physical layout in Treblinka be you go in with the railroad train . you get out from the railroad train of the undress place . one side be a barrack . on the other side , be a barrack where the -- the woman undress themself .", "you get out from the railroad train of the undress place . one side be a barrack . on the other side , be a barrack where the -- the woman undress themself . in the middle , there be a place where they take water from there , some to drink , some of they not to . then , it be , from there , there be a way , which they call -lsb- non-english -rsb- .", "it be four or five of they . INT : be there a process that you go through immediately when you arrive there ? what do they -- do you have to undress ? you mention you have to undress . AB : yes .", "INT : be there a process that you go through immediately when you arrive there ? what do they -- do you have to undress ? you mention you have to undress . AB : yes . INT : then what happen to you next ?", "and we go in , and they tell we what to do . we have bench . the woman be all naked . they be sit on the bench . and we have to do we job .", "and in the bath , they again , they look we over . and they make my mother a cross on she chest . because we be all naked , and I do not know what they see , or what they do not see , and they make a cross . but I have a very clever cousin -- a young cousin -- and she say , what do you have there ? and she take something , and she rub it off .", "and -- and I be always ready and I say , I will go . I have no shoe . just wooden -- not even clog , just -- just the sole and there be just this strip of material on top . but I go volunteer . and with the girl , we be take this stuff off and singing , just singing .", "I remember those hide be on , on the piano in the parlor . we do not have a warehouse as such . and he cut they into strip . and then we have some woman that come . and he give he buckle .", "rd : I tell you what , it be in this strasdenhof , there come one , a german . there be a kapo . he say , they be doctor , and he say to all of we , you have to dress completely naked . so everybody look at each other . what we go to do ?", "there be young , young child . they be not even marry . so we all dress up completely naked . and then you be stand between two stick and look it , if you have not get any -- any lice . and who he like , he take on the side .", "over there be a little mill , and we use to discharge a lot of water , like in a pond . it be dirty . he use to make we all undress and go into that pond in the middle of the night , take a bath , take we out . now , he say , you be clean . that be fun with we .", "you know , so this be what we go through , and then they put we in -- in a -- in a barrack , fill up the barrack . INT : do they give you clothes ? zf : not yet , naked . now you go into the barrack , and a guy come , you know , and the -- those barracks in Auschwitz use to be a polish army camp . INT : what barrack be you in ?", "so we both go . we do not have nothing . you leave the kibbutz , you leave naked . INT : yeah . and where do you go from Rehovot ?", "the door be about , I would say , probably 2 inch thick . and we know a carpenter , whom we call . and he make a cavity at the bottom of the door with a strip of wood that be on two screw . the door be take off the hinge . in that cavity , my mother be hide all the jewelry with the two strip .", "and he make a cavity at the bottom of the door with a strip of wood that be on two screw . the door be take off the hinge . in that cavity , my mother be hide all the jewelry with the two strip . so whenever we need a piece of jewelry , we have to take the door off the hinge , take the strip of wood , and take a piece of jewelry , and put the door back on the hinge . so most of the valuable be hide there , so they hardly find anything .", "the door be take off the hinge . in that cavity , my mother be hide all the jewelry with the two strip . so whenever we need a piece of jewelry , we have to take the door off the hinge , take the strip of wood , and take a piece of jewelry , and put the door back on the hinge . so most of the valuable be hide there , so they hardly find anything . but it be a frightful experience , the way they behave , the way they -- they turn everything around in the house , the way they be take out drawer and throw everything on the floor .", "I will never forget the name . I also will not forget the face . and they make the people strip . they put they against the hill . and they be go around with machine gun and killing .", "we have no idea . they take we to a appellplatz in Gross Rosen . and they ask we to strip completely . and this be end of October . it must have be -- this be in a area that be very cold .", "it must have be -- this be in a area that be very cold . it must have be like 20 degree . and we have to strip completely . they take away we clothing , shoe , everything . and they run we to a tent , into a tent .", "and we be apprehensive to see what be go to happen . and when the water come out , it be the greatest of relief . from the shower , they run we naked and wet into a barrack , where they be throw clothing at we -- shoe and stripe suit -- disregard the size or whatever . and then they take we to another barrack . and we be put on this clothing .", "I use to read about a book a day when I be a boy , even six , seven . and I use to fall asleep at a table . she would pick I up , undress I , put I in bed . and I wake up in she bed next morning . and she use to take my side in whatever battle or between my brother and myself , or if my parent would criticize I , or try to punish I , she would always take my side , protect I .", "and if you do any , any problem , or if you do not go to mass on Sunday , he will punish by put a bag of dry bean he have in a corner of the classroom , and the kid have to kneel holding , 45 minute of class , on the bean . and I can tell you that after you get up , you could not walk -- so that type of education . also we have nun that teach we , or teach , anyway , the -- the christian child , rigorously , that you should not look at yourself in the mirror ever -- ever look at yourself naked in the mirror . when you get dress , get dress that you do not see yourself . it be sinful to look at yourself .", "we get out to the jail . we go -- make we run , with scream , hit we with the rifle butt and whip that they have , around the jail 's building . and there stand four of other prisoner , naked . next to they be a -- a hill of clothing . we have to run further .", "beneath the gallow . they make we grab the dead and drag 'em through the snow to a grave that be dugg out . and then they hang four that be stand naked . and after they hang they , they run we around the building , toward the undress area , again scream and beat . it be dark .", "they make we grab the dead and drag 'em through the snow to a grave that be dugg out . and then they hang four that be stand naked . and after they hang they , they run we around the building , toward the undress area , again scream and beat . it be dark . it be very , very cold .", "right when we get to Majdanek , they -- on a run , they open the -- the car , and there be people dead already . and on a run -- again , scream and beat -- they run we to barracks in Majdanek . and we have to undress naked . and there be a whole line of prison . there be a few thousand of the prisoner in the transport .", "inside the barrack be a bench . there be several prisoner barber sit at the bench . and naked , you have to pass they . they would , with clipper , shave or clip you hair and you pubic hair . and then you go further , and there be a ss officer standing , look at you .", "and he order punishment , beating . they have place a -- a special bench they have for beating , for whipping , where you lay down . they strip you pants off , expose you buttock . and two prisoner with whip would beat you . there be 25 whip .", "INT : now , let 's just go back from before you be send to Auschwitz II . when you first arrive at Auschwitz , what do you remember of you first day there ? AB : when we -- yes , when we arrive at Auschwitz again , we have to undress . and we go through a selecktia , they call it -- selection -- where the ss officer , whoever he be , look at you . you have to run past he and back again naked .", "AB : when we -- yes , when we arrive at Auschwitz again , we have to undress . and we go through a selecktia , they call it -- selection -- where the ss officer , whoever he be , look at you . you have to run past he and back again naked . and again , either you go -- he make a move to the right or to the leave on a field , which , one mean you be accept , and the other , you go for recuperation , as they state in they book , which be the gas chamber . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and I pass .", "hunger be a daily problem face by all the inmate . but , you know , hunger be a devastating weapon . hunger strip you first of you strength , of you dignity , of you pride . hunger also strip you of you identity . hunger also strip you sometimes of the will to fight back and often also of you will to live , to go on .", "but , you know , hunger be a devastating weapon . hunger strip you first of you strength , of you dignity , of you pride . hunger also strip you of you identity . hunger also strip you sometimes of the will to fight back and often also of you will to live , to go on . and once you give up , once you do not care , you perish .", "hunger strip you first of you strength , of you dignity , of you pride . hunger also strip you of you identity . hunger also strip you sometimes of the will to fight back and often also of you will to live , to go on . and once you give up , once you do not care , you perish . there be nothing to sustain you .", "there be nothing leave on we body but skin and bone . I do not think that we could appeal to a man as a female . but just think what it do to we own person , stand there and view each other totally naked , totally helpless , totally powerless , so degraded . what do they do do to we ? it be at time such as these that you sometimes begin feel that you be indeed a untermensch , subhuman .", "we think that by sheer power they will overcome Hitler . nobody take the german army lightly . but I remember when I watch they through the hospital window , I see the Germans on the 24th of June , two day after the start of the war in Vilna , how they strip and immediately wash -- everybody wash half he body in cold water , you know , and so on . although it be summer , but I see they be strong , young , and -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- very , very kind of -- they look kind of a determine branch -- bunch . I -- I think that it will not be easy .", "and I -- I remember when -- let 's say when we have to -- be able to wash in the washroom in Plaszow . and whoever be in charge of turn on the water or turn off the water , they have a order to turn off the water . so we could have be stand there naked full of soap , and the man come and they have to turn off the water . and there be nothing we could -- we could do about it . I even remember a moment that I be -- I do not even realize that I be naked .", "so we could have be stand there naked full of soap , and the man come and they have to turn off the water . and there be nothing we could -- we could do about it . I even remember a moment that I be -- I do not even realize that I be naked . and the -- the man come to turn off the water . all I do be cover my face .", "RF : yes . INT : where these selection -- can you describe one of the selection ? RF : I -- I do not think -- well , there be send at he whim -- some woman -- the selection be often make when we be naked . so some that be robust and -- and healthy look be send to the good side to work . and those be skinny to the -- be when they be go with the transport .", "and he distribute among all the inmate so we have something to start we after-war life with . to sew something for we -- some decent clothing , and so on . because we be all the time with -- in we strip outfits . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- so my mother and I , we -- we go to Prague . also , my aunt and my cousin .", "and take away the clothes . then we have to go . they give you strip clothes . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and then you go through , you know , to little table there . and they give you number on you clothes , on you clothes .", "and the american soldier say to he -- he know in English , that soldier , to say with the hand up . and he come from the step down like that with a big coat the girl find somewhere , a tear up coat . it -- and underneath , he be almost naked because he throw away all the uniform there . all wrap up in that coat like that . and he walk -- and he tell he again .", "and , like , 10 other people , they all die . only the two , they be still barely alive . and they be place naked between two german soldier to body -- warm they up to see , experiment . and the professor do not believe that these polish girl be go to be bring from , from Poland to be on trial . and that be very unbelievable moment like that .", "I be sorry . those day it be $ 4 . each of we , we have to strip . they search we . then they ask we what we be go to do in Belgium .", "every train station have a little police office . and there be a ss man and Ukrainians . they tell we to undress , which we do . and they search we clothing . and later , one ukrainian hit I right in the throat .", "the officer of ss , yeah , yell at he . if not for the ss man , probably be beat very badly . and later , they tell we to undress . and they put we to a -- they have a little arrest -- a little jail in the train station . they tell we to go in , and we go in , all the man .", "we be very , very well guard otherwise . now , I be healthy . they tell we to undress . I undress , but instead to give the clothing to disinfection , I put it into my mattress . I manage to hide it and just wait for the occasion to run away .", "now , I be healthy . they tell we to undress . I undress , but instead to give the clothing to disinfection , I put it into my mattress . I manage to hide it and just wait for the occasion to run away . now , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- I be healthy .", "yeah . and -- -lsb- cough -rsb- so the card be collect . they be order to undress , to tie the shoe , they should not be lose , and to march . on they march through a hallway , about 200 yard long . about five -- I would say , six feed wide between barb wire .", "on they march through a hallway , about 200 yard long . about five -- I would say , six feed wide between barb wire . they be march -- they be march naked to -- the man go earlier , straight to the gas chamber . the woman be -- on the end of this corridor be barracks , and they be direct to the barrack for the hair be shear . and later , when they be -- the hair be shear , they go back to the main corridor and meet with the man in the gas chamber .", "that be right -- a mountain -- they be up in a mountain and kill every day more people , more people . people be go to work , but majority -- every day you could hear it . like my own husband , they take they , and -- for no reason , they take he from , from the barrack where he be sleep and put he in a hall where the same day , they kill 200 , 300 people and -- naked already in the hall to be shoot . and somebody say to the german , be -- there be a inspection ? those people have to go out because we be have -- they will find out that we kill everybody .", "like my girlfriend be stand next to I . and she say , Esther , what smell like that ? and we be naked . just go in , and mengele with the stick -- Mengele , he be in charge of Auschwitz -- with a stick , 1 , 2 , 3 . and she look at I .", "and we go on -- we climb the truck , but we suitcase stay on the sidewalk . and we lose even the little thing we have of we own . we be strip of everything . and they take we to Belgium , to a convent . -lsb- non-english -rsb- it be a convent .", "the only thing , sometimes we get stuff from people that be evacuate , and we see there , like , three shirt one into the other . because a lot of people , when they be ship out of the ghetto , would wear a couple of thing , you know , one on top of the other . so when they be undress and be take away the clothes , one be in the other . and one of the woman recognize she cousin 's clothes . so we know that the people that be evacuate , there be really -- probably be not alive anymore .", "INT : to clean up . jh : -- to clean up and process . and so after this deportation , they take the people that they leave over in this two block area , and under the direction of the Germans , they go house by house , block by block , street by street , and they strip everything that be leave over , and take everything that be worthwhile , pack it , and ship it to Germany . and that be the main reason why they leave the 3,000 people , to do cleanup work . INT : and then , where be the 3,000 cleanup worker send ?", "Jacob , along with some member of he family , have be deport from Czestochowa to Treblinka in the summer of 1942 . when they arrive , about half the people of he car be dead from heat and lack of water . the rest be unloaded on the ramp and chase with whip and dog to a field , where they have to undress . at that point , a assessment pick he and a few other healthy-looking young boy and tell they to step out . they be take to join the group that service the Treblinka death camp facility .", "there be -- he always have a translator for these foreign worker . and he examine I . I have to strip naked . he notice I be circumcise . he notice that something be -- but he ask the translator he should ask I whether I have some operation when I be a kid on my genitals .", "they -- they -- they cut we hair . we be triple zero . they give we strip uniform . old civilian uniform have to be give away . all the possession have to be give away .", "and I have to do some masonry work . and I go to the basement there . and there be , in that -lsb- inaudible -rsb- , there be stack of dead prisoner , completely naked , with they -- with big number of theirs write on they belly . they be ready to be take to the crematorium . they be stack like wood -- I mean , hundred .", "MW : let I just bring up another incident -- another incident , but it be a routine . every Saturday night , the whole block , the whole barrack , have to proceed to so-called -lsb- german -rsb- . everybody have to strip naked , and the -lsb- german -rsb- , so-called -- the charge of the , of the wing , of that , of that barrack -- check for lice -- check -- check at the -- by the genitals , under the armpit , because there be -- there be a lot of lice . every Saturday night be a nightmare for I . I figure , this be the end of I .", "INT : now , you stay at Ravensbr\u00fcck end . would you tell , tell about what happen then ? MW : it be towards the end of April -- well , in ' 45 , I would say it be March ' 45 -- american airplane be fly over we camp and throw down these -- these metal strip and cover the whole camp with metal . so we do not know the -- the meaning of these metal strip . but we know these be Americans .", "would you tell , tell about what happen then ? MW : it be towards the end of April -- well , in ' 45 , I would say it be March ' 45 -- american airplane be fly over we camp and throw down these -- these metal strip and cover the whole camp with metal . so we do not know the -- the meaning of these metal strip . but we know these be Americans . as a matter of fact , I be work at a kommando near ravensbr\u00fcck and from a -- from a high -- higher elevation , I could see Berlin .", "and they come with ddt . and I remember they say , -lsb- non-english -rsb- . we have to throw ourself and -- and try to get rid of many clothes as possible , if possible , undress yourself , if there be available . I get everything out and get the green -- I be all green and -- and white and dirty , you know , but the louse must have run away , leave and right and everywhere . and it take about two hour .", "and the watch band that be hang down from he pocket be make out of bead , like the Indians make the bead . and these bead make a swastika . so it be a , a green and white strip of bead with the swastika on it . so these people would fence . and like Cyrano , each time when he score -- my friend , John Schporer -- he also hit that band that the watch which be hang down from he pocket with he sword .", "so we arrive to Strasshof . and -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- they disinfect we . you have to undress and go through all sort of examination , naked man and naked woman . and doctor check we out . and we stay there I think two day or three day .", "they just throw it in there . so the Germans discover that . and they select a group of people , who -- make they undress completely . and they have to go in into the latrine , up to they neck in this -- and fish out all the jewel and everything that be put in there . INT : how do they pick the people to go into the latrine ?", "and we be go through this very tall barb wire , and finally , from one camp into another , and be take into a building that -- be a brick building . be huge . we be order to undress . we clothes be take away . and we be sit on bleacher .", "and if I close they and open they up again , maybe the whole thing will disappear . it do not . we sit there naked in the company of complete stranger for the better part of the day . later on in the afternoon , we be line up for registration and tattooing . they cut we braid down .", "and I say , I will cooperate with you if you bring my mother here . and I remember , they say , well , you could see she tomorrow . and I could think , really , how on earth will they reunite we tomorrow when they just strip I apart from she earlier this morning ? that -- it seem to be so -- such a bold lie that I could not really accept it . my -- unfortunately , my poor sister believe it .", "I just enter the place . I could not believe my eye . there be the corpse , the naked corpse , of three dead child . they eye be wide open look at I . and I become very angry .", "the other part of the experiment be do in Auschwitz . we would be march there , put in a huge room , maybe 10 set of twin at a time in one room with about 5 or 6 doctor all dress in white coat . they would keep we naked . they would measure every part of we body , compare it . let 's say , put a instrument and squeeze it against we skull to see the size of the head ; then compare it to child 's ; then compare it between each set of twin -- the nose , the ear , the eye , the shape of the face .", "and then they would wipe it up and wash it off . we be -- these experiment , for all its practical purpose , be not deadly . but they be extremely difficult to deal with -- six to eight hour be naked . I do not think that anybody , even we in Auschwitz , want to feel like a piece of meat . and we have be reduce , in this case , to a mass of breathing , living cell .", "that night , the soviet soldier come , bring candy , and bring vodka , and start dance the -lsb- non-english -rsb- in the middle of that stupid barrack . we stay in Auschwitz . and the follow day , they take we out , put on we strip uniform , and march we between the barb wire , and take picture of we -- movie camera . and I think , gosh . now that be interesting .", "EK : this be 1985 , when we go back for the 40 year to the liberation . I always feel that the selection platform be a focus of a very important of my feeling . it be a little strip of land for -- of about 40 by 150 at its longest and its widest point . and in that little strip of land , more human being be tear -- more family be tear apart than any other place on the face of this earth . and so we leave a plaque there to the memory and we pledge that we would look for the truth .", "I always feel that the selection platform be a focus of a very important of my feeling . it be a little strip of land for -- of about 40 by 150 at its longest and its widest point . and in that little strip of land , more human being be tear -- more family be tear apart than any other place on the face of this earth . and so we leave a plaque there to the memory and we pledge that we would look for the truth . and we light six candle to the memory .", "and we do not know where she be go . and just as we reach -- just as I see the back of she head , Mengele go like this , -lsb- GERMAN -rsb- , these two , my sister and I , and he take we to the life side . and then they take we into this hideous place , what they call the disinfection , where they strip we of we clothes , and shave we head and pubic hair , and throw a rag at we . if you be that big , you get a garment this small or vice versa . they just throw a rag at you after they shave you , within seconds .", "that person no longer feel anything . I on the other hand , feel the desperate cold . so what we would do be strip they of they clothing , and thereby you could -- you could acquire additional warmth -- additional warm clothing by have another layer . we do not strip they naked because then they would have notice it . but we could peel off something that could help we .", "I on the other hand , feel the desperate cold . so what we would do be strip they of they clothing , and thereby you could -- you could acquire additional warmth -- additional warm clothing by have another layer . we do not strip they naked because then they would have notice it . but we could peel off something that could help we . or I could put my shoe on the dead body and get hers because hers be in better condition .", "or I could put my shoe on the dead body and get hers because hers be in better condition . you do understand what I be try to say ? and -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- right along with that kind of goodness of -- of give you own bread and try to convince you that you be not hungry , that go on at the same time , strip the dead body . but even that be some kind of a -- or I -- you know , somebody might have take off a piece of clothing and give it to somebody who have less than she have . so side by side , right along each other , there be act of greatness , great humanity , and great deprivation of the human soul .", "and this be the -- the beginning of concentration camp . this be Birkenau . we be take from there to Birkenau , because we go through the -- the undress and -- and -- and everything else and the disinfection , what they call , and disinfect we all . it could have be a gas chamber . what do we know where they be take we in there ?", "and this be when -- Birkenau . they take we all to Birkenau from there into barracks , and they give we the striped clothes , wooden shoe . we be strip of everything . I remember I do hide some picture . it be the only thing which I be able to hide -- some picture inside my body , inside my buttock , as a matter of fact , and I bring they in to camp .", "I would be the first one there . today , I mean , wintertime , I would not dare go out . and I would go out half naked . I mean , I would run into the -- and this be quite a bit to run . I would say it must have be about 300 yard to run to -- to the bathhouse .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- she use to take , you know , the people , take a iron brush and take the chemical that you wash the -- the -- the -- the ammunition , you wash in a special solution . they be so terrible , bad , that when you work only with it , the fume make you sick , make you have the whole hand sick with rash , everything . and they -- she use to wash they , take they naked , in front of everyone , wash those people . INT : what people ? dn : the -- we -- we inmate , they wash it .", "and he give I a piece of -- of soap . and he -- he watch -- the -- the fence be make of stone that nobody can see from the outside what be on the inside . I -- I do not care if he see I naked or not . I wash myself . I be dirty because of three day of wait to go to the -- from one train to the other train .", "so we be walk in a little town , helmbrecht . they put we in a room , and there be no facility for bathroom , for nothing . they put in the front a -- a pail , and that be -- and take we all naked . and that be how we be sit there in helmbrecht . I be go to go there now .", "AM : helmbrecht . -lsb- non-english -rsb- . INT : during the march , they take you to Helmbrechts , and they make you undress ? AM : yeah . we be young .", "we be young . they put we in a -- in a -- a big pail of water . that be suppose to be the bath , and that be naked , how we -- we be sit there . no food , nothing . and that be the worst --", "INT : in one room . MB : but it be a huge room . and so they want to undress the coat and put it nicely together . so I say , lie in the coat , because it be more -- you can not -- you will be cold and uncomfortable . have a look what I will do .", "mb : no . after a few hour , when we have be already so tired and -- so they take we to the washroom . we -- they -- we have to undress quickly and naked . and then they put we in big bin , 10 in a very dirty something water . and then naked we come out .", "we -- they -- we have to undress quickly and naked . and then they put we in big bin , 10 in a very dirty something water . and then naked we come out . men come and take all the hair from everywhere , naked as we have be . they be laugh .", "and then they put we in big bin , 10 in a very dirty something water . and then naked we come out . men come and take all the hair from everywhere , naked as we have be . they be laugh . anyway , and then when we have be half-frozen , so they give we a remnant of russian prisoner of war thing what leave over , which be like a shirt-type and pants .", "three massive grave . three massive grave . and the people be lay one -- naked , one on top of the other . and they give they the bullet in the neck , apparently . there be no blood , no blood whatsoever .", "and they be throw candlestick , and candelabra , and whatever else that be worthwhile in silver . and then they start look for gold . they make my mother undress to remove she girdle . and they stop with that girdle , and they be go over if there be anything hidden , whether dollar be hide there , or some jewelry . I will never forget that experience .", "we know she have nothing on she . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- but nonetheless , not -- nothing would have stop they from kill she . they do it to every woman in the building , that they have to undress and hand it over to they , they girdle , they bra , whatever , if anything be hide there . but from my mother 's house , they take on maybe 50 kilo of silver plus good linen . I guess the porcelain they do not take because it just would have break .", "he be a very good-looking man . and we , each one of -- and also some of the policeman , the jewish policeman mention to we that we be -- that this be Mengele . and -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- we have to get undressed , strip , undress , and carry we belongings . at which point I remove my glass also . I be uncertain if its -- I be do the right thing .", "-lsb- laugh -rsb- and he want to , you know -- he know I be jewish , but he be try very hard to convince I . I say , look , first , before you try to very hard to convince I , I say , you -- you look after yourself and you wash yourself a bit more , and I will not look when you wash . and he do not want to undress . he be very shy , but a very nice guy . and then I have another fellow who laugh all the time .", "gg : no . first , we go to work , we have to be entlouse . we undress ourselves , we go into the bath , they start to hit we with rubber hose , they start -- everybody sit down . shave . they save we hair of prisoner -- other prisoner do .", "oh , in the meantime , I find a dead Russian . a dead russian prisoner with -- with -- with a paint in the back , with a head in the river . I undress he , take it off , I take my uniform off , and I put he uniform on . and mine I throw away . so I have a russian pow uniform instead of he -- instead of mine .", "but lucky , later I realize that this be not the gas chamber , that this be a regular bath . they take we to the bath . they strip we whatever we have . we have little bit of jewelry . they take we clothes off .", "they cut we -- we hair flat -- my sister and I , and my cousin . and then we go into that shower so-called , from one door . and we leave all naked through another door . they give we some clothes . they give I -- I be tall -- a very short dress .", "she do not recognize I . all -- we be all , we hair be shave off . we be strip of we clothes . we just be so confused . we do not know what be go on .", "they still think that we be healthy and strong enough to work . so they take we out on appell . they strip we clothes . and -lsb- sigh -rsb- somebody come , like a businessman , and select we to take to work . so they select about 200 girl from the Lodz ghetto , and we be send in to a concentration camp to Bad Kudowa , Sackisch .", "mr : no . everything be take away from we . we leave Auschwitz from the bath house naked . INT : ok , thank you . mr : this picture be take in 1946 .", "and -- and -- and once in a while , we would go to the old turkish bath . but we would go to the new turkish , which be really bulgarian bath , but be very modern . very , very modern , with mosaic and with tile , and with this -- now , another ritual -- they would have big , husky man in the man 's area and heavy-set lady for the lady area , that they would wear something on they hand and there would be strap through they waist and from waist up , they will be -- they will be naked . and the man , we would go and those man be big , very strong . and after we be into the steam , they would come and they rub you skin to make sure that nothing unclean be leave on the skin .", "they be in this business . and I go , and they teach I how to clean window . and they tell I how to strip a floor . and pretty soon , just like in the Marines , you give a jewish fellow a grenade and a couple of gun , and he be in business for himself . -lsb- laughter -rsb- he do well .", "they be talk nonsense in the high fever . horrible scene of -- of -- of -- confused people from delusion from high fever . one of they be run out naked in front of the barrack because he wedding taxi arrive . I recall that scene . and -- and I remember the day when I find that I myself have lice on my clothes .", "be about eight foot from the ground . and it call -lsb- russian -rsb- . you have to clean that tree -- that tree , strip it from , from the core , you know , which be the outside of the tree . completely clean . and most of it go for telephone pole .", "that be strictly extermination , one of the first one , which , as far as I remember , be initiate in December of 1941 -- very , very primitive . they start with this thing here until they develop those big camp like Auschwitz and the other one . and the way we , we be tell be that there be -- people be bring there by bus , and that they be park overnight in a church and strip of they clothing and load into a special bus , which 50 or 75 people be able to get in there , and the gas be release in a short time , which take about 15 minute . it be something like 15 kilometer , something like that , to that forest . and by the time that bus reach the station there , the people be dead .", "and I have bleached hair , which be unusual for a young girl , as I be a peasant girl , right ? so this be already a bad thing . I -- we leave the clothes and then come back and walk naked around with the polish police . and we have to pick up this -- I show you this id -- the number , right ? you have to have this number tag and pick up you clothes .", "and the order be that the battalion commander have to come ashore as rapidly as possible in order to get control of they unit . a amphibious operation be a very difficult operation because you be land on hostile shore . the enemy -- you be face a enemy that be already dig in , and you be relatively naked because you be get out of small boat and rush at they . so the senior commander have to get ashore rapidly in order to get control of the unit and determine how you be go to assault the german position . so yes , I be -- all the battalion commander come ashore at 10 minute after each hour .", "fs : and that stall everything . then we have to pull some troops out of we army to send over to help the troops that be be attack on we left . so we be strip of troops , and -- to try to reinforce the Bulge . and that , that Bulge be finally stop by , by Christmas , actually . it would -- or right after Christmas , it be pretty well stop .", "all of a sudden -- at that time , the first thing I see be several hundred body lie inside in a open space near the -- this gate to the prison area . and there be several hundred dead people lie there . most have be strip nude , no clothing on they . and I , I do not see any live people in there at that , that moment . but just a few moment later , the whole place erupt .", "-lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- the human body literally explode when they get to zero -- down to zero pressure . and then the other experiment he be conduct for the Luftwaffe be to see how people could -- how long they could exist in cold water . so they would start out at degree like 40 degree and strip they naked and then get down to 30 degree and see how long they last at various temperature . presumably , this be for the German Air Force in case they ditch out over the sea . so those be agonizing death , of course .", "crew : go ahead . fs : the second row -- there be picture take at the crematorium . and one of the picture on the end be where they have haul the body , strip of clothing , and they be stack there , ready to be put into the furnace . the -- those be prisoner , camp inmate , who pose for these picture and show we how it be do . but they be the one who be compel to handle all the body and put they into the crematorium , where they be then reduce to ash .", "INT : the left or the right ? fs : well , on the end , it show the furnace . the middle picture show a area where they -- they strip the corpse of all the clothing , take out any silver or gold filling that they have in they tooth , then they hang those clothes up in a rack there , and they issue they to the other inmate . they never waste any clothing . but they strip all the dead of all clothing before they cremate they .", "the middle picture show a area where they -- they strip the corpse of all the clothing , take out any silver or gold filling that they have in they tooth , then they hang those clothes up in a rack there , and they issue they to the other inmate . they never waste any clothing . but they strip all the dead of all clothing before they cremate they . then they have stack of they hang up there in that building . the end picture on the end here be a picture of the confinement area , or the prison area , show the prison barracks , the barb wire fence , and then a path run right along the barb wire fence , and then -- then the moat , a moat fill with water , which surround the camp .", "crew : ok . fs : that be one of the first site I see as I approach the confinement area , or the prison area . those be human body , be strip of clothing . they be inside the prison area . now , those be get -- be prepare for haul to the crematorium for cremation .", "I do that and I miss . it be enough you miss one -- the key do not fit . she come the next thing to the place and she have such a leather -- every german be walk with such a leather strip -- strap . and she strap with it , hit I over -- straight over my face and throw the key and tell I , you better make that key fit or else you will pay with you life . so of course , I be help at that point and double check that the key should fit and all that .", "gg : that be all ss . we be on the -- on -- continuously under ss guard . that you have to understand , when we leave camp to the railroad station , we be strip search , that nothing should come out of the camp , come back to camp , once again , strip search . that nothing can come from the radio station , back . that be why we could not manipulate , we could not organize anything .", "and we see that -- we hear the tremendous -- I mean , the pain , what these people have to go through , that must have be beyond any human pain . beyond what -- what they -- and we have see , sometimes , outside , people walk with -- naturally they do not have any gauze or any -- or and sterile way of do it . but people half naked , walk -- walk around with a rag or something , cover up they wound . and some of they collapse , some of they , many of they , go against the wire . I mean , that be probably the -- the -- the -- the most difficult part of -- of Birkenau to -- to be able -- to be next door to -- to be next to that -lsb- german -rsb- camp , to -- to see what can be do .", "take , take you clothing off . and we be go to the -lsb- non-english -rsb- . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- stripped naked , strip naked , and all we have on be we leather belt on we waist line . otherwise , we be completely naked . and they be search .", "and we be go to the -lsb- non-english -rsb- . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- stripped naked , strip naked , and all we have on be we leather belt on we waist line . otherwise , we be completely naked . and they be search . they be search .", "and she never get into the camp . so my mother now still always say to I , I save you life with this hat and coat at the time . so -- so when we enter , they say , undress . so first , we take we jacket off or whatever , but not we underwear . and they say , everything , completely naked .", "so -- so when we enter , they say , undress . so first , we take we jacket off or whatever , but not we underwear . and they say , everything , completely naked . and the Nazis , and the ss be walk around . so , you know , we -- and just shout , undress , undress .", "and they say , everything , completely naked . and the Nazis , and the ss be walk around . so , you know , we -- and just shout , undress , undress . and so , eventually , we do . so we have to stand for hour and hour in row naked , wait to be register .", "so , you know , we -- and just shout , undress , undress . and so , eventually , we do . so we have to stand for hour and hour in row naked , wait to be register . and a lot of people that they be thirsty . we want a drink .", "do not fall down , because you will be right away select . stand close to each other so that if you fall that you fall on somebody that the Germans would not see that you faint . so the naked body kind of stick together . and we be in shock . it be quite terrible , this first moment .", "and we be in shock . it be quite terrible , this first moment . and then we have to go in front of a table , all naked , and have to register we name , we profession , religion , everything . and most people give up profession which they do not have . so my mother say , you be a seamstress .", "and my mother say , again , look she be a young girl . leave a little bit of hair in the front . and I have a inch of hair in the front standing so I do not look quite as awful as all the other , you know , naked , and no hair . it really look awful . and then we go to the shower .", "and we know that very often after shower there be selection go on . so when we come out of the shower , we see the Nazis , and Mengele be stand there . and we , naked , of course , have to turn , walk past he , turn around , and walk on . and he be say which side to go . and I go in front and he put I to one side .", "INT : A selection ? es : a selection , when my mother be select to the wrong side . so about 20 or 30 people be put to the wrong side , and they be stand there naked . and we -- we be all naked , and we be still stand there , and they be march out to a different direction from where we be go . and I think , well , I have lose my mother .", "es : a selection , when my mother be select to the wrong side . so about 20 or 30 people be put to the wrong side , and they be stand there naked . and we -- we be all naked , and we be still stand there , and they be march out to a different direction from where we be go . and I think , well , I have lose my mother . and when I run to my mother , my mother still whisper to I , go and tell Mini .", "some be some rubbery thing . some be hard linen . we have to tear it in bit of strip and then plait it into plait about a inch wide . and -- and it have to be very solid . it be be test , because it be all different bit so it could be slip out and it would break .", "and they rush I to -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . and that be where when my -- when -- Mordechai have see I , he start to cry . and then one of the girl , -lsb- INAUDIBLE -rsb- , start to run undress I . and somebody give I a warm glass of tea . and then I somehow relax and slowly after change clothes and be wash a little bit , fall asleep .", "they take he away with other people . I and my mother come to a big , big hall . they ask we to take everything off , just to be naked , and put it on the floor . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- that time , somebody tell we -- I do not remember , a woman or a man . they take woman on one side , man on the other , that I should not say that I be my mother 's daughter because they will push -- put I someplace else .", "she give I those five coin , gold coin , and five -- call -- lira , lira . so when we go over there , the Germans tell we to leave everything down . and we be naked . about 200 people be over there . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- only man .", "another trick over there , tell they to tie up the shoe together and to put all they clothes together because they be go to come out from the shower to find the shoe and the clothes again . that be a trick from the Germans . so when all those woman they be naked , they be go from a corridor right in the gas chamber . and the woman , of course , they be ashamed to be naked lady . and they be go one to another so close .", "that be a trick from the Germans . so when all those woman they be naked , they be go from a corridor right in the gas chamber . and the woman , of course , they be ashamed to be naked lady . and they be go one to another so close . and the kid near to the mother , you , know .", "and everybody scream and so on and so on . and they be go right in the gas chamber . in the meantime , in the back of it from another room , they be come naked the man . and when the woman be see the man naked , they would start again scream . it be a shame .", "and they be go right in the gas chamber . in the meantime , in the back of it from another room , they be come naked the man . and when the woman be see the man naked , they would start again scream . it be a shame . it be a shame .", "and for two minute , we give we a hot shower -- hot shower . I mean , and come a little bit from a -- from a tube it be come a little bit water -- hot shower . and then , naked , we make we walk in a hole , to get out . the hole -- all the window in the one side all open , with that cold to kill we . so we go outside , all naked .", "and then , naked , we make we walk in a hole , to get out . the hole -- all the window in the one side all open , with that cold to kill we . so we go outside , all naked . and everybody shake from the cold . and what become over there -- ice on the -- on the ground .", "so one , with each other , to get warmer , to -- what happen over there be they now be the one they be in the center , the outside , the be -lsb- inaudible -rsb- they be go around in the center . the one who be in the center be come out . I do not know how many hour -- two , three hour , four hour we stay over there , naked , with that snow and that cold . afterward , and they get we out of there , I do not know how many dead body it be right on the ground . they take we from there .", "they take we from there . they put we in a barrack . the barrack be not big enough to hold all of we -- still naked . and they make we sit down on the floor in line , like this , one knee to the other , like this -- line , line , line , line . at that night , this -- come that guy , the ss guy , the red one , that we use to call he -lsb- ?", "and my mother say , Thea , do not look , do not look , do not look . so I look , I see it , but I keep run . and then we come -- you know , then we come into a big room , and they say strip . we have to strip everything completely . and that be the first thing .", "so I look , I see it , but I keep run . and then we come -- you know , then we come into a big room , and they say strip . we have to strip everything completely . and that be the first thing . the second thing , we have to sit down and get shave all over , you know ?", "and this guy , which he take the money , he tie I up over here . he say , run . he tie I up , my -- I be naked . well , December 6 , 1942 , cold -- the finger -- but we have one shoe , one sole -- one shoe . -lsb- backround noise -rsb- and right away , the guy tell I -- which I tell Elze Gellar -- you do not have a pair of shoe .", "and he say , run . you run . where be we go to go naked ? I mean , naked -- a little shirt -- a little shirt , tear . we run .", "you run . where be we go to go naked ? I mean , naked -- a little shirt -- a little shirt , tear . we run . who -- how much could you run this -lsb- inaudible -rsb- snow , half a mile ?", "there be two cow . it be warmer there . and I be naked . and they give I a thing to , to put up . and I take -- have a needle with cotton a little bit .", "and they take all these people and they tell they to go up to the second floor . they line they up . they tell they to strip they clothes -- man , woman -- and line up against the wall . line up against the wall , and they tell they , they say , listen . the bullet be too expensive to spend for jew .", "so the floor collapse . so this man Stanley , he fall down from the second floor , all the way down to the basement . without clothes , naked and everything . he wake up because of the fire . he get burn .", "he be gon na do whatever . I do not know . so my poor friend -lsb- non-english -rsb- , he be naked . you know , he be nude . no clothes , nothing .", "crew : ok . go ahead . hb : I really do not know who this naked person be . now , it be actually I . I think I be about two or three month old , I guess .", "Food every day . we eat every day , no problem . and I wash every day with a rag , because we do not sort of undress . we stay in the same clothes for 13 month . yeah .", "they have all die or be exterminate . every morning young body be outside -- be winter -- be put outside . Old , old , old people , young people , always naked , because they clothing be a -- a currency . you could buy something over the fence for clothing . and you know , my parent get rid of all they clothing very quickly , get a bit of bread from the Poles , you know , over the fence .", "a longer connection on the attic from one chimney to the other chimney for the smoke to go out . I be so little that I crawl in in this little area . I undress myself completely naked . completely naked . leave the clothes on the floor .", "I be so little that I crawl in in this little area . I undress myself completely naked . completely naked . leave the clothes on the floor . and I crawl in down there .", "that be one thing I want you to know . you will never know from anybody else . the Jews have to undress themselves , completely nothing , before they lie in the grave . put the clothes . then they make announcement .", "there be a baby on my chest . and they -- they have nothing to dress . the baby naked . the baby 's cry . it slap my nose to wake I up .", "if you do not want to go , because of I , you do not have to go , but I be go . but then , some -- and then , they select -- they -- they look we over . we have to strip , take off everything . she do too . I pass , she do not .", "pb : they tell we to -- I -- to go outside and to line up . and they look we over . not naked , but like this . whoever they do not like , they -- I do not know where they take they . and I --", "I do not know what happen to they . I be still with my father and my mother and my brother . and people be undress themselves naked in the train . it be so hot , there be no water . and people be die there .", "and he leave I . and I go in . there be a selection naked . and we be stand in fives , like this . and I be the last one .", "you understand ? they have torture for -- for we , I can not even tell you . they make we run around naked through the whole camp , all of we . backwards and forwards . I do not know why they do that .", "and now , my -- my -- all my trouble start , because now I be not anymore protect from selection . and there be a big selection in the camp . and my mother -- naked . and we block by block have to go to selection . and Dr. Mengele be the one that be make the selection .", "and somehow or other , they do not take I , because she do -- you know , get my name out of the list . Schmidt , the kapo . and that night , the lorry come and they take 2,000 woman naked to the gas chamber . -lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- well , we have a perfect view of the gas chamber with the big chimney , because it be very close . the stench of the body that be be burn , and there be not smoke come out of the chimney , but fire .", "eg : and in the tent they be check we that we should not have food , or knife , or gold , or whatever , money with we . INT : when you say , check , would they search you ? eg : they strip check . INT : Strip search ? eg : Strip search , exactly .", "INT : when you say , check , would they search you ? eg : they strip check . INT : Strip search ? eg : Strip search , exactly . and then we have with we about eight boil potato .", "eg : they strip check . INT : Strip search ? eg : Strip search , exactly . and then we have with we about eight boil potato . somehow they let we take the eight boil potato .", "she be a very nice person . she try to save we , and help we . when I -- when the selection come for the work , we go through naked from the block 18 to the 16 . because the -- the even size -- number , they be one side . and the uneven , the odd number on the other side .", "so naturally , we think that -- I think we be go to work . in the b lager -- -lsb- sigh -rsb- -- we have to take off every cloth again . we be naked on the -- all day in the yard , at night -- and no food . at night , we be -- they tell we to go into the barracks . and when we walk in , everybody get a pajama top .", "and before they reach the ground , they kill they . they shoot he . they strip he of he stuff . that be how good these people be . INT : ok , so we be just about to change tape again .", "AG : he -- he tortured I in a sense to humiliate I . INT : what sort of thing do he do ? AG : he take I into the operating room , completely naked , call in all the nurse to show they how a jew be circumcise . and he say he be go to kill I . verbally , he tell I .", "and then we go through this -- they tell we , they take to a one big barrack . and they say we should put all we stuff down there and take off all we clothes and just put it in a pile . and we walk out from there naked . then , we be in a -- in a row where they cut off we hair . and when we come out of the other side without hair , I do not recognize anybody .", "and those two , the mother with the two daughter be next to I , and we try to be together . those other two girl I could not find anymore . and we be sit outside in Auschwitz for about half a night , or -- naked in a -- in like , a -- in a field . in the morning , they assign we to a barracks . so there be people in there already .", "INT : ok Sonya , you be describe to I what happen when you arrive at Auschwitz and when you be assign to the barracks . describe to I what you see again . sb : when we be assign to the barracks , they give we clothes because we be naked till then . they give we -- so , you know , they take you into a room . and there be pile and pile of lay there .", "and they start take out those people . and they take they out . they be all undressed , naked . they clothes be put away in a shack . and later , they check the clothes , whatever it say , or whatever they do it .", "so I be think about the family , sure . and this be that . INT : and you be naked . ls : oh , yes . everybody , the same thing .", "and not in a famous place , but a nice place . and we be there , make out pretty good . but then one day close to a year , Gypsies move in , and that whole strip -- a lot of Gypsies move in . I do not know from where they come . and there be so much -- so much noise and so much problem .", "-lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- and they do get a piece of Czechoslovakia , which they call -lsb- inaudible -rsb- , which be on the other side of the Olza River . the river be the border . they get a strip from that . and they want colony , too , so they come on -- on -- on -- on the big square -- it must have be in '38 or something -- and they make demonstration . we want -- we want colony .", "so when -- when the war -- in 1939 -- when the Poles say they be not gon na give , and the English say they be gon na protect we , Poles say we be not gon na give nothing . so on -- on Friday , September the 1st -- I think it be a Friday -- I go with my father to the -- to iron supply to buy some metal he need . it be long strip of metal , so he need I to help he carry it home . it be long , maybe 10 foot . you know , I would take one end and he would take one end , and we would walk home .", "and the smell be terrible . and in the morning , we see already . so they make we undress . and we stand outside . we undress outside .", "so they make we undress . and we stand outside . we undress outside . we put all -- all we clothing in a package and lay it down . I take my mother 's ring , and I put it in a piece of soap .", "they take we out , take a shower , and go on the other side . and we get a pair of pants . you go naked to take a shower in the same place where the gas come out . INT : do you say there be no gas ? be that --", "it be wonderful see he . I absolutely worship this chap -- great soldier , brave , honest , kind . and he could tear you off a strip if he have to . but a terrible time to live through . and then , of course , the regiment go off to they various place to report .", "and she come in . and she be wear a pair of Kriegsmarine trousers and one of my battery 's football shirt . now , you know the slip which Collingwood use -- black and white strip -- well , that be the same strip as we use to use , except it be , you know , black and white all the way around , not like Collingwood , with a pattern on it . and she come in wear this . and we all look .", "and they lock the door from the outside and say that they be go to bring the Gestapo . but first they have to get rid of this stuff that they steal . and they leave my father practically naked . oh , all -- all of we practically naked . and -- so -- and -- and they leave .", "but first they have to get rid of this stuff that they steal . and they leave my father practically naked . oh , all -- all of we practically naked . and -- so -- and -- and they leave . and there be no way out , except , you know , like , jump from the window .", "there be always a man or two man or three man , I do not remember how much . it would start . they have to undress . he have to undress and jump in to the swamp . be up till here , till he neck be the water .", "it would start . they have to undress . he have to undress and jump in to the swamp . be up till here , till he neck be the water . and then they use to see the two guy , and Schnabel use to watch it .", "Change of tape INT : Day be August 28 , 1996 , and we be interview Molly Ingster . you be just tell I that you have be , I guess , in the undress area of the gas chamber . MI : this be the -- the -- the big hall behind the gas chamber . it be very hot there , and it -- this be winter when we come .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- but I never experience anything like that . as we be look out from we bunk , there be another transport come in . and these people come completely naked . they be undressed . and they do not look people .", "this be very important . after a few week , we be round up and there be this -- this ballroom all -- again , you know , it be a very huge room . and we be -- those 1,500 girl -- we have to undress . and when we look at each other -- I mean , when you see it all behind you , I mean , it be a horrible -- I can tell you , it be -- again , you can not describe it . it be indescribable the way we look by that stage .", "and I do not feel anything . and that be -- but it be still like the same , like before . but on Friday , by the time I go on Friday , it be apparently -- it be already obvious to -- to even -- with a -- you could see it with a naked eye , that everything drop . so you know , the baby must have be already , you know , for quite a few day . but it be not detect .", "and we be push into the barracks . and there we stand in line . we be tell to strip , put everything on a bench , that we would come back for it . and I put my shoe . I have shoe .", "so I take this little , this picture and put it in my shoe , think I will come back for it . and they shave we . men who stand naked , be shave we hair , be shave here . so we be so humiliate . I feel so dehumanize , like worse than cow .", "and she use to have lady of the church come to tea every week . and whenever I come to -- from school , she would make I stand on a stool and she would say , now , this poor little refugee . if it be not for I , she would stand here naked . and if it be not for I , she would be hungry , you know , and all this . and I resent it very much .", "ukrainian people be stand and look from nearby , and grab the clothing , whatever they could , from the Jews . down in the grave be one ss man sit with a machine gun . they have to undress themselves and walk down step . when they walk down the step , he be go through with a machine gun and kill they . INT : how do you find that out ?", "they -- we go to school together . in the morning , they come in . they tell we to get out and they give we about 10 house in one of the strip . and they tell we , you go to be all right . you be go to live , and everything will be ok .", "and the german Shepherd see with the ukrainian police . they rip he apart . and the rest of the people be walk to the street , to they grave , naked , up to the grave . for they , they dig another grave already because over there be full . when they come to the grave and they come outskirts of Brailov , which be next to the big grave , they have -- yeah , my brother , who be still in Brailov be tell by the ukrainian police a night before that you family , they bring they all back .", "there be absolute -lsb- german -rsb- , closure of the camp . and we hear terrible noise , and terrible beating , and terrible scream . and they be load they into truck naked . they know perfectly well where they be go . and they take all 5,000 people .", "with the male , it go relatively smoothly . and with the female , it be a living tragedy , for they be spit . First of all , they be naked . the woman be naked , and they be make fun of they , and scream at they , and spit at they . anyhow , we be divide into people who be capable of work , and who be not .", "and with the female , it be a living tragedy , for they be spit . First of all , they be naked . the woman be naked , and they be make fun of they , and scream at they , and spit at they . anyhow , we be divide into people who be capable of work , and who be not . and then they make a transport of thousand man , young man .", "and they would always , when some of the key ss man would come with we , so they would take he inside of the laundry and I just get a echo . so I go to the thermostat -- a primitive kind of thermostat -- and we raise the heat to the top . we be work half naked , which the ss man like , but they have be in feel uniform and they last about five minute and they be out . then I have three free day of -- for this go only for three day . so I become a servant for the leadership -- prisoner leadership of the camp .", "the custom at that time be , by the Germans , to fleece the people for contraband . and it be do in various way . Strip yourself naked , open you luggage , search the compartment , in -- in various order . INT : how do it affect you ? ec : in -- in we case , nothing .", "my -- the first one to leave be a uncle , Uncle Willy . and I , as a matter of fact , like he very much because he be a very outgoing guy , very free spirit . and I go with he to the airport , which be a dirt strip in those day . and I remember he take off in one of those old plane into Switzerland . eventually he wind up in London .", "tell I , why do not you put on one ? and I take one . because I be almost half naked . I have no clothes . and that particular day -- so he look at I .", "when we arrive in Auschwitz , it be a -- like a different planet for we . we do not know where we be . and be send in , at the original -- when we come at the time , we be send to big building , big hall , where we have to be strip naked . and then we have be give some other clothes . we clothes be take away .", "every time , every day , there be people die . and the corpse be lie behind the barracks heap up . they be most of they , most of the time naked . because the clothing that the dead people have be take away by other prisoner in the survivor urge . I mean , the dead one do not need it anymore .", "INT : what be you able to wear at that time ? sh : we have always just the same . when we come , we have be strip of we clothing . you have to realize that we have be have we suitcase -- they be not -- never give to we . they be just take away .", "put it away in the side . and they make he to dig a big trough all the way . and they make he to stand up naked by the grave and they shoot he in . INT : do this Mr. Fischel see this ? hb : yeah .", "and there , in the middle , stand the doctor who examine . and -- and I be cold . and we be all naked , you know . and -- and then , first , he make a approve face . you know , because I be in good shape .", "he have hang himself . another time , one girl , she be crazy . and she use to run -- run naked into the village . so they have to run and -- and bring she back all the time . another guy take a big nail , stick it through he throat .", "maybe they come a few day before . and -- and they take we to the zone . and before we go into the zone , they tell we everything -- everybody naked . you should never keep even a hankie -- nothing . we do not have nothing , because everything be so -- so much lice .", "INT : ok . and what happen when you arrive in Mauthausen ? bp : oh , after this , what I tell you , we have to undress and wait because the people who be go to -- they be wash . this a little bit I will explain . I be do everything to be back -- in back -- back .", "I tell he listen , Doctor , you have to help I . because I have dress . and I undress . it be stink , you know ? rotten .", "and the inside people be a red stripe . this be the condition . so if you see with a red strip or yellow strip you will know exactly where they be work . but the purpose be that nobody could -- can run away , because immediately they know they place . yes ?", "for example , I see when we come -- when we -- when we be work in villa Goeth , they bring from ghetto a group of rabbis with wife , with child . it be not far away because , the grate be always open . and we see the group , they take off everything , and they be naked . they shoot they . and with I , especially with I , be a elderly man , also good painter .", "-lsb- laugh -rsb- we come , it be autumn . it be afternoon , on the day , and -- in the morning we come there . afternoon , that where everything take out -- naked , thousand people -- snow and rain . naked , a huge place -- and we be like -- like the ship , together , because -- and we be -- they should -lsb- inaudible -rsb- -- open there , open there . they be look for gold , for I do not know .", "it be afternoon , on the day , and -- in the morning we come there . afternoon , that where everything take out -- naked , thousand people -- snow and rain . naked , a huge place -- and we be like -- like the ship , together , because -- and we be -- they should -lsb- inaudible -rsb- -- open there , open there . they be look for gold , for I do not know . we be wait for shower , bath .", "-lsb- laugh -rsb- after , every three people get one towel . now you can -- and after , they put we out , run , run , run , run . how -- maybe , I do not know , half mile , to another barracks , naked , wet . one give you a pull-over . one give a shirt , and one give we shoe .", "and they be terrorize people . and they say we be all go to go now to the ghetto , I think they say . but they make everybody undress , just have they underwear and something . this be December the 30th , the coldest night of the year , probably . and my mother and I be allow to keep we clothes on because we be carry the bushel basket .", "so right there , they take we to -lsb- inaudible -rsb- to clean up whatever we have , in case we have some flea or whatever . and they -- they shave we head and shave we everywhere . and we be naked . we come out naked on the side of the -- of the barracks , where -lsb- inaudible -rsb- be . and then they start to look what we have , what else .", "and they -- they shave we head and shave we everywhere . and we be naked . we come out naked on the side of the -- of the barracks , where -lsb- inaudible -rsb- be . and then they start to look what we have , what else . and I have this ring .", "and I have this ring . and I do not know what to do with it . so be I be naked , completely naked , and they be look in the ear and everywhere . so I -- I -- I have tooth at the time , good tooth . and I -- I somehow break the ring -- and -- and swallow the diamond .", "she live in Calgary now . and so when you -- that be the first inclination we have that there will be -- that we will be transport somewhere . and then they call -- then they -- and how they call , and you get sort of a piece of paper like a telegraph strip where you say you should present yourself there and there with the 52 kilo that you can carry . or maybe it be just you name and you assign number . I do not think it be -- the 50 kilo it be issue by the -- by the office of the jewish elder .", "we go through the selection , we be tell -- which be in the child 's block . the chil -- it be empty on the -- on the chimney . we have to undress and march naked in front of the assemble -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- -lsb- inaudible -rsb- of Auschwitz . the chief be -- that be a good name , not only this -lsb- ? Kramer ? -rsb-", "I still remember it to today . and -- and -- and -- and I pass the whole business . and here I be sit under a bomber in -- in -- in Linz on the air strip by the american army , and they be suppose to fly we to Paris . Fine . I have a pajama shirt on and short pants .", "rm : my father be , like I say , he be stand in a different -- a different group . they take all the jewish community , the leadership , to the jewish cemetery in we town , on a truck . and all the remain jewish people in town , the cripple , older one that could not walk -- 500 in all -- they take they to the jewish cemetery and just strip they naked . the grave be wait for they . they have to chase they .", "but the -- but my father , when they bring he -- I gather this from the people who use to live across the street from the cemetery . they observe the whole thing , what be go on . like I say , they strip they naked , they chase they all around the cemetery with they whip . they beat they , then they line they up in front of the grave and machine gun they . some people that fall to the grave , maybe get hit in the arm and the leg , they just bury they alive .", "so we take a shower , bunch of we . we get out . we be naked , run around naked in the camp . then they give we a uniform . everybody have to go get the uniform .", "so you wash it out . they give you soap , and you wash the uniform . so we use to sometime -- so we would run out naked , like that . a little bit sunny , it be ok . then , later on , you put it -- take in the barrack .", "the eastern part be take away by the Russians . and the western part be take away by the Germans . and only a narrow strip be leave for Poland . and I remember that we question this pact . we wonder , will Germany ever attack Russia ?", "and she be kill . and my brother run out . he be run naked , completely naked , do not have time to dress . and then we meet . and the people around we , they know that mother be dead .", "and the 50 of we have to line up , one by one , still in we civilian clothes , and march into the tent . on the side -- the right side of the tent be ss woman in uniform . so one by one , -lsb- non-english -rsb- -- undress . everything undress , but you know , in the bitter cold . so we undress .", "on the side -- the right side of the tent be ss woman in uniform . so one by one , -lsb- non-english -rsb- -- undress . everything undress , but you know , in the bitter cold . so we undress . then the last woman -- a little while -- examine we , you know , if we be not hide anything -- you know , nude .", "so one by one , -lsb- non-english -rsb- -- undress . everything undress , but you know , in the bitter cold . so we undress . then the last woman -- a little while -- examine we , you know , if we be not hide anything -- you know , nude . a gynecology -- or I do not know -- examine we .", "and this unit be call Canada . we be assign to do -- to sort the clothing after people -- you know -- people still do not go to the gas chamber in 1942 , because they be not build . in 1942 , you know , it be already in one barrack the pile of -- of they luggage and the clothing , which we undress . and we -- we job be to sort the clothing , and you know , separate the underwear , panties , and so on , and bundle they neatly in 10 in a package . and then , you know , the other barrack be where we load those package .", "people , you know , who do not look so good , who already fail on they health , they could not stand straight . or you have mark , you know , bruise around you -- everything . you have to undress . and then , the ss from the row -- people -- I mean , girl -- who be in camp already a year , six month -- wear out . so they just come out -lsb- non-english -rsb- from -- from -- from the row , and separate , and to -- and they be go .", "it be the -lsb- ? sauna ? -rsb- where the people be undress who come to live , I mean , the working , slave laborer . and 95 % go straight to the gas chamber . and you have to look on day and night , see the flame high in the sky , and -- and the smell , and the cloud settle , and the ash -- black , greasy , -lsb- ?", "I admit I always relate inmate to crime inmate . so whoever we be , one of those , ok , no , two of those . and they strip I of my bread and beat I up pretty good . and when the train come to the next stop , I could not move . so the -- one of the Germans come in , and he see I lay there .", "just take a piece of paper , take a pencil , and start make little -lsb- point -rsb- mark all over . and when you get the whole paper all cover , that be a diagram of what , what these grave look like with the body just throw in all over , arm stick up , leg stick up , butt stick up , head stick up -- all over . most of they naked -- some of they have clothes on . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- there be evidence that they be try to burn the body . -lsb- pause for 7 seconds -rsb- you , you get to remember , we be go into this place cold and not know anything , what be -- what be go on anywhere .", "and one day , they call we all out and say that we be go to -- that we have to go through selection . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- we line up . we have to undress completely , carry we clothes on -- over we right arm . and there be Dr. Mengele with he henchman , move he thumb to the left and to the right . and I be choose to live .", "the soldier , they be all cover up , like , you know , like you see they when they go to the Gulf War . you know , they have all this -- everything cover up because they be afraid to catch typhoid from we , because there be so many lice and typhoid and thing like that . and you only could go out completely naked . so they put a stretcher down , and before you know , you have 10 naked woman there . but of course , they take it one after the other .", "you know , they have all this -- everything cover up because they be afraid to catch typhoid from we , because there be so many lice and typhoid and thing like that . and you only could go out completely naked . so they put a stretcher down , and before you know , you have 10 naked woman there . but of course , they take it one after the other . INT : we will take a little break now -lsb- inaudible -rsb- .", "so -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- we come in . we come into a barrack . we have to undress completely , be shoven -- shoven hair , under arm , wherever there be -- we be shoven . and those people who do the hair cut to we tell we right away . you see , you see -- we see the chimney .", "and he be load with they to the track . and they leave . and they take we and -- to a barrack , where they tell we to undress completely . we undress . and we be walk to a second barrack .", "and they leave . and they take we and -- to a barrack , where they tell we to undress completely . we undress . and we be walk to a second barrack . we clothes be leave there .", "and we be walk to a second barrack . we clothes be leave there . we walk naked . it be November . we walk to the second barrack .", "all the Jews have to stay in the barracks while the Gentile people be go to they kommando , to go out to work . after , we get this little piece of bread and the juice , what they call coffee . we undress . we have to be undressed until this german commission come in . if they come at noon time , so you be for five hour naked , stand there and wait for they .", "we undress . we have to be undressed until this german commission come in . if they come at noon time , so you be for five hour naked , stand there and wait for they . and if you be lucky , they come after a hour . so you could get dress again .", "and he be write down the number . we have to file in one line . and we be naked . we march toward the officer , to the ss office , have to pull out we tongue , have to turn around to , to the rear , and then turn back . and then the ss make like this or like this .", "we arrive to one place , and the first thing they do , we have to take everything off . everything go on a heap . the clothes which we have , we have to undress . everything go completely . and of course , we have to be completely naked .", "the clothes which we have , we have to undress . everything go completely . and of course , we have to be completely naked . I carry all this for what ? anyway , and then they start shave the hair , and they shave we everywhere , you know , and put such a horrible , smelly disinfectant , which be burn like hell .", "when we arrive , people be already say , let 's hope it be not -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . people already sort of know a little bit . but then we get frightened , and especially if they tell we to undress completely . I have a pair of shoe , which be still all right , so they take they off I . if you have tattered shoe , they leave you .", "I do not know what it be call . anyway , he look at I . he tell I to undress and to look at my chest . and he be shake he head . he be very upset because he say to I , you can not travel anywhere .", "at that time , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- anybody who could walk have already be ship off . they be be -lsb- ? strip . ? -rsb- people be call out .", "there be the building of Warsaw 's central court that have the entrance on both side . you could enter from the ghetto and just walk through the court and walk out on the outside . you just have to find a way of pull off you sleeve strip with the star of David . but my mother choose this way . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- I be absolutely terrify .", "we have to get up at 5:30 AM , have a quick wash . there be some small bottle of water on the bench . we could not undress for wash . get dress , make up the bed , tidy the bedroom , go for mass . and later we have breakfast .", "the central heating have break down and nobody could repair it . well , it be so hot in summer that I would open the door . and there be not really a balcony , but a sort of a very narrow strip enclose by a railing , and I just put my foot through that railing to have a bit of fresh air . and I work as a proofreader . and then , after a while , I be ask to learn to work on a linotype , which be the print-setting machine then .", "they open they up if there be nothing hide in the braid , you know , gold or , or diamond . -lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- so they open up my hair . and we be stand naked -- completely , just , you know -- -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- and they tattoo we arm . and this be my name for the last , next two year , 56065 . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- we be tattoo accord to ABC , so I be Butnick .", "can you see it ? finish ? -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- and then they tell we to walk through the street completely naked . I do not know if I should put my hair to the front or to the back or to hide myself . men be walk around .", "INT : you say you walk over . how , physically , do the selection process work ? lt : naked . you have you clothes under the arm . and you just walk .", "to the left , to the right . just like that . everybody be naked . and he look at you , do what he like or whatever . that be why I say to my sister , do not -- let 's not go all three of we together .", "they take they to Sweden -- maybe 200 people . and I remain there . and like , May 1st , they bring in a lot of muselmann people -- man with blanket -- naked , from another camp . and we look at they . I say , what be go on here ?", "I say , what be go on here ? be the war to -- and we do not even know if the war be go to end . but we look at those man , the naked , skin and bone man -- as you see it -- with the blanket . and they stay in we camp . and May the 2nd , they say , everybody out from the camp .", "but once he come to the barrack . and he be take gold and , you know , whatever you have -- money . you know , and he tell I to undress . and I undress . he take my my wedding ring and something that I have -- I get from he , -lsb- INAUDIBLE -rsb- -- once he give I some -- I do not know -- four leaf --", "and he be take gold and , you know , whatever you have -- money . you know , and he tell I to undress . and I undress . he take my my wedding ring and something that I have -- I get from he , -lsb- INAUDIBLE -rsb- -- once he give I some -- I do not know -- four leaf -- INT : Clover .", "he give I for my birthday . and he take this and something else . and then he -- I undress and he tell I to dress . he can shoot I just like this . because you can -- when they shoot somebody , they say , what be happen ?", "very nice doctor . when you want to have a day off , or something , you feel ill , you come to he , old man . he say , you undress . you have a day off . INT : and the doctor who take he place be name ?", "I do not know when it be give to we , but we have a cake of soap . I be stand with that cake of soap in my hand , and I be hold the last bunch of picture in my hand . and I be look at the pile , and I be naked . and I say , if I throw this away , I will never see the face of my parent , ever . and I start to look through the picture so quickly .", "my father have put picture and some jewelry in -- in the lining of -- of my jacket . and those -- you know , that be my sort of security . and when we be put through the shower , you undress , and you go through the shower -- at that time , we already know about some of the shower be disguise as , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- you know -- uh -- -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- as a -- not -- not a crematorium , the , uh -- the gas chamber . they be disguise , these gas chamber , you know , because they do not want any panic . so , with this knowledge , suddenly we be in this huge shower --", "and we be suspicious . so I remember , all -- we be there -- the first time that I lose my clothes be in Czestochowa . so -- piece of soap , naked , with a whole bunch of people here , and we wait . and finally we see the water come down and not -- not the gas , and we -- ah ! we be go to live !", "we be speak polish and yiddish or -- or german . you can hear all these language . now , so when we get in and we undress and go through the shower , before go to the shower -- or no , after the shower -- there be this huge -- -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- it look like -- like a pool , but much smaller than -- than -- than a regular pool , a swimming pool . and everybody have to go through there , and it be sort of a white substance . it -- it -- it be some sort of a disinfectant .", "he have heart problem . INT : can you tell I a little bit about what happen day to day to the people that go to the right , the people the do stay alive ? mg : when -- well -- when we -- there we walk to a big room where we have to undress . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- then shower start -- a cold shower . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and we be really even happy , we be refresh .", "1,600 woman and child and 600 man . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- now , before they come to the pit , about 500 meter , they stop . they undress they . they take all the clothes . and the people go naked to the pit .", "they undress they . they take all the clothes . and the people go naked to the pit . and when they come there , they shoot they . and they be kill up to 4 o'clock in the afternoon .", "lp : yes . then we go to -- they take we to the -- the camp . and they tell we to undress and shave we the head , shave we the hair . and then they give we uniform with the stripe , like a prisoner 's . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- then they go and mark we those number , in the hand , with a needle .", "they use to call it -lsb- non-english -rsb- . that be the name they give , -lsb- non-english -rsb- , that nobody 's allow to go out . and the german use to go block to block and tell the woman to undressed -- I be , myself , in it -- to undress naked . and one by one , they use to pass through they naked , of course . and they be look at you if you have not get any disease or anything like that .", "that be the name they give , -lsb- non-english -rsb- , that nobody 's allow to go out . and the german use to go block to block and tell the woman to undressed -- I be , myself , in it -- to undress naked . and one by one , they use to pass through they naked , of course . and they be look at you if you have not get any disease or anything like that . the one that do not like it , they take the -- the number from the hand -- because we do not have name , we only have number .", "and in the nighttime , they come with a truck that take they to the gas chamber . that be every week we have to do that . they come , and to be naked in front of they . everybody have to go one by one . and they have to look at you up and down , if you be sick or not sick .", "Nonstop . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- then when they go in , they -- they take they to a room . they undress themself . and they send they to the -- to the -- where the gas room be . they gas the people first , and then they take they to the oven .", "they sleep on mat . they be give -- they be hose down . they be strip naked . there be people snitch on other people . there be mistrust among the people in the concentration camp .", "and unfortunately , at the same time , the Arab fighting start . and the corridor between the northern part of Palestine and the southern part of Palestine be very , very narrow . there be only a strip of land , perhaps 4 kilometer wide , in jewish hand between the northern and the southern part . and we -- and , of course , the road go through . and one kibbutz , Negba , be close by actually guard this narrow point .", "and we -- and , of course , the road go through . and one kibbutz , Negba , be close by actually guard this narrow point . but we know if this point be break , if this strip be break , the whole southern part of Palestine , the whole Negev , will be isolate . strategically , if you look at the old map , it be a nightmare . nobody could -- nobody with -- with the right mind would believe a country can be hold where a strip of land by Jerusalem be only 25 kilometer wide .", "but we know if this point be break , if this strip be break , the whole southern part of Palestine , the whole Negev , will be isolate . strategically , if you look at the old map , it be a nightmare . nobody could -- nobody with -- with the right mind would believe a country can be hold where a strip of land by Jerusalem be only 25 kilometer wide . 40 million Arab -- Arabs be against 800,000 -- -lsb- background noise -rsb- INT : you stay there .", "and they take about 10 boy , nice-looking boy . and they take this man also . and they undress they half up to they waist . and they put they against the wall . and they say , if you be not go to give all the money and all the jewelry , we be -- we be go to kill these people .", "how can we go in public ? we be raise , we be so religious . so -- I would never undress . in front of my sister , I would never get undressed . and here , you will have to go to the bathroom in public .", "we be so embarrassed in front of man . -lsb- sob -rsb- we do not know where to put we hand , where to cover ourselves . we never stand naked in front of other people . it be so difficult . they cut we hair .", "but then they take we in front of the crematorium . and we know that we go to the crematorium . and they put we naked if -- in , in a like a big stable be there . and we be there a whole night . but that time , they bring in from Lodz -- this be in September , end of August , I think , begin of September -- they bring in from Lodz ghetto train .", "and they select the people . so they , they select . they -- we have to get undressed , completely naked . and we have to show we hand . and they look at we eye .", "we get there in February -- the beginning of February . it be bitter cold . I use to get undressed , completely naked because the -- the lice be in the clothes . I say , I just want to freeze to death . I do not want to be eat by the lice .", "both room be still fill high with gas , shoot , hang , and tortured dead body , a sight I shall never forget . most all body in the room number three be dress in prison clothing , striped suit . yet , but all body in room number one be naked . oh darling , it be a horrible sight . the gas chamber be a room with airtight steel door label , shower bath . '", "so we be kind of ready , a little bit , with knowledge that what -- what be go on . and so -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- there be another thing , before , when we come to Auschwitz the second time . we be stay outside , naked -- outside , and we be very thirsty . and again , and so somehow the Germans , they go and get a barrel -- a big , big barrel . and then people stand , I do not know , there .", "as long as my water food be not yet there , in that line for the water , I feel a hand over my neck . and I fall to the ground . and I be naked . well , it be that gravel -- sharp gravel . I get this side , whole be scratch and bloody .", "and the german soldier say , there be a woman in a military sweater . I want she right here , to the door . so I just come to the door , and I take off the sweater , and the top be naked . I think they be go to take I out , and shoot I . but they do not .", "and if I want to go -- I remember when -- I do not know the other girl , when they go . I remember myself . they be naked already , because they be take off they -- they -- they clothes from they there . I do not know why . I be not at that time in the Totenkommando .", "not mention that we be very careful to be tell if somebody else be watch the border guard when they be patrolling . and whenever they be patrolling , we go five minute right after , you see , and at night , so that we do not have any trouble from the -- from those border guard . and if they would have catch we , we have these papers , as long as they do not strip we , we could talk ourselves -- oh , I must mention that we all speak both language , fluent , no accent . and that be a very important part of the story . and maybe take away a little bit from the heroism of the whole thing , because if you do not speak the language , you be lose .", "and it have big spool -- what be that , about a foot ? and behind my machine -- oh , the -- this five-meter long machine have I do not know how many dozen of these big spool -- and they be feed from behind my machine from big bin . there be strip of cotton about -- what be that , four inch , five inch wide -- and half a inch thick . and they go through a -- a row of needle , and evidently those needle divide that -- that strip of cotton . and so then , by the time I see the cotton , it come in a very thick thread , I would say , about like my finger .", "and behind my machine -- oh , the -- this five-meter long machine have I do not know how many dozen of these big spool -- and they be feed from behind my machine from big bin . there be strip of cotton about -- what be that , four inch , five inch wide -- and half a inch thick . and they go through a -- a row of needle , and evidently those needle divide that -- that strip of cotton . and so then , by the time I see the cotton , it come in a very thick thread , I would say , about like my finger . and the spool be wind it up .", "now , this be a new chapter in itself . they take we to a bath . so , we have to disrobe to the bird suit -- naked , completely naked . have to drop everything , leave it in a pile -- the suit -- go into a bath . go , I remember , it be a big tub , a very big tub -- 50 , 60 people could go in one shot .", "no , forget about towel . Nature dry you up . I have to go in January weather , which be cold , to go brand naked and wet , through the outside , outdoors , where we come into the -lsb- non-english -rsb- , to the room where they assign the clothes . that be another thing . how we survive , do not get pneumonia , I can not say .", "I get two kilogram of gold in my girdle , hide . and I will survive the war anywhere . little do they know that they will have to undress and leave everything . from the experience I have later in Buchenwald and in Dora , I know what happen to she gold . INT : thank you .", "and they work as engineer and stoker . and it be decide at that time that Palestine be too far , so they would go to Cyprus , because we do not have enough coal . but even the shorter distance to Cyprus prove too long for the little coal that be there , so they start really strip the ship . they take all the bed , all the mat , every piece of wood which be not absolutely necessary , and heat the ship with it . and the ship be float on the water just like a metal skeleton .", "so the -- -lsb- pause for 7 seconds -rsb- the people who be in charge of the transport decide that we be not go to leave without a fight . and so they decide that we offer passive resistance . and we be all instruct not to dress , stay naked , not to pack . and when the police come in the morning , they might be embarrass to see we , especially the woman . and maybe we can accomplish stay in Palestine that way .", "nobody move until , I do not remember the exact time , but it be after 8:00 , until we finally hear scream and yell . and apparently , the military and the police have enter the hut of the single man , which -- who usually stay separately somewhere . and they just drag they out of bed , naked or not naked . they beat they up pretty heavily , blood be flow all over , and drag they out . and there be big scream and yell and cry and what have you .", "crew : ok . ls : on the right , there be a picture of the ship Atlantic , just to show the crowded condition . on the -- on the right , it be the same ship during the time when they try to strip the boat of all the wood in order to provide material for we departure . -lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- I be sorry my child can not be here today . but this be a picture of both of they , Peter and Judy .", "before I go to this place , I -- I be send to the Gestapo center in -lsb- inaudible -rsb- street in Warsaw with other polish people , man and woman , for a medical examination . and the medical examination , they take all the clothes for -- for cleaning , for dry cleaning , or disinfection . and we be stand on the table naked . and the doctor be examine we , see if we have no disease . no , no -- they do not want to bring disease to Germany .", "there be a little opening where the -- to open they . and when they be go , they go -- when they could see that they be go already to change they , and so on , so they go down . and there be only a strip there -- there -- to let they out . so the police do not want to open the door . and one of they tell I , if he want -- if Kaufman want to save he wife , let they pay .", "and they take we for selection , again , which mean we go in a big place and empty . and we keep in we hand the shoe and other hand dress up . and naked we go around , around , around . so that be -- it be Mengele again , or somebody else . I be not sure .", "that go -- that be life . finally , end of July we go again for selection . again , shoe , dress , naked , walk , german dog Shepherd be there . the Germans , do not matter . we be walk .", "INT : tell I about Ponary . mg : Ponary be a place where they take people , 10 in one side , 10 in the other , with machine gun , and they would shoot they , and they will fall in . but before they take they , you have to get completely naked . in the beginning -- oy , I have to tell he , too . in the beginning , they close they eye .", "mg : yes , of course . INT : and what do you see there ? mg : nothing , just a naked place . nothing . INT : be you home go ?", "and it say kosher meat . another story be that the Gestapo come to we , to we apartment . and they , they make everybody strip naked . and they take anything they -- you know , if you have any jewelery or any fur or anything of value , they take that away . INT : do you , do you remember that or be this --", "and then there come a -- there come a -- a -- truck with people , with jewish people . and they come off the truck . -lsb- pause for 9 seconds -rsb- they have to undress naked . then they have to be around . they have to go on they knee .", "anybody nationally know or internationally , like Mengele ? mr : oh , we get -- we get a visit of Mengele . we get -- we be order to get naked on the -- on the appellplatz , and he look we over . sure , sure . INT : what do he do after he look you over ?", "three time or sometimes two time -- three time a day , we have to walk to the appellplatz . it be cold . we be naked . we be -- nothing to wear . we be sticky .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- that be it . INT : do you ever find out what happen to you family ? js : well , I do meet a woman who tell I that my mother be in a group of woman , about 200 of they , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- that , either in 1942 -- I be not sure which date -- or the beginning of ' 43 , be march out into the wood by the ukrainian collaborator , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- give shovel to dig , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- tell to undress , and they be all mow down . there be a mass grave in the outskirts of the city . they have a light , there , burning , a eternal light .", "and we wash in the forest , you know , with the cold water -- whatever be available . and we sleep in we clothes . we do not undress . we go to the toilet in the bush . there be no paper .", "and you fill out the form . and you have no recourse . so it be this understanding how the machinery of the state can be use to sort of strip people out of existence which become a very significant influence on my outlook . much of the Holocaust -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- discussion deal with out-and-out brutal beating , shooting , murder , and what have you . there have be very little give in term of documentation of what proceed that process , where the machinery of the police state , in fact , start prepare people for the final solution .", "INT : be that a source of embarrassment or pain when , when you would have to wear that ? PS : oh yes , oh yes , it , it be a , a sense of embarrassment . but by that time , of course , you know you be strip . I mean , you have go through two year of strip -- you know , no radio , no book , no movie , no music , prescribe place where you can live , curfew . no fur coat be a big deal , no fur coat -- a law that Jews can not have a fur coat .", "PS : oh yes , oh yes , it , it be a , a sense of embarrassment . but by that time , of course , you know you be strip . I mean , you have go through two year of strip -- you know , no radio , no book , no movie , no music , prescribe place where you can live , curfew . no fur coat be a big deal , no fur coat -- a law that Jews can not have a fur coat . INT : tell I , if you could , when the first deportation begin , and how that start to occur .", "INT : so please continue . please continue . pl : and so I go into the river , which bypass all the checkpoint , swam couple , couple of kilometer , naked with my pants wrap around my head , you know , with a belt . when I be out of the way of Trencin , I just get out of the river and start walk in the direction of a mountain call Inovec . Inovec be the tallest mountain in the -- in the Trencin district .", "but -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- the hardest thing be , in Auschwitz , when they select we . always select naked , and you hold you hand and go around . and we three of we do not look like sister . my youngest one blonde , my middle one red , and I be dark hair like she .", "RZ : no , no , no . that be not -- not far . that -- not far from the toilet there be a little fence , and so there we could see how they be take the people from the train to the gas chamber , naked . INT : you know they be gas chamber ? RZ : yes .", "and they be tell to put the suitcase -- they be give number . they be tell put the suitcase on a place . and they undress , and they be go for -- for health reason to -- to have a shower . and that be it . INT : and do you --", "I get out of it . and then there be another incident . do I see the people , they be -- you know , the naked -- where do I know that the people , the woman , be take in Sobibor to the gas chamber ? I say , there be we toilet , but between the toilet and the barrack , there be a little fence and it be a brush fence . and when the brush dry out , we could see through .", "you might ask , how do you talk to I now ? I be there . we be undress like the rest with german perverted precision , precision . we have to put -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- pants , we panties rather , and dress , on different little heap . there be mountain of clothing .", "we have to put -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- pants , we panties rather , and dress , on different little heap . there be mountain of clothing . and as soon as you undress -- it might be a -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- trivial detail , but the Poles who be assist the Germans , they be there in a shot , look through the seam of the clothing in case you bury something , you have something in it . and they would turn around to the Jews who be -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- shot , say what do you bastard need this for ? you do not need anything any longer .", "he have -- -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- do not disclose it when -- in the usual questionnaire . so he obtain american citizenship illegally . and consequently , as a war criminal , he be strip of it . INT : how do -- how do -- be that do ? be you there when that be do ?", "INT : be you there when the verdict be read ? KL : no , I be not interested . and eventually the court decide that he have violate the law of the United States and will be strip , accord to the -- to the legislation , which be -- be introduce by Elizabeth Holtzman , and some other legislation on the subject of he citizenship . he appeal . and the appeal , I think , go up to the Supreme Court and be reject .", "and people sort of walk in the middle of the street . there be no street car or any other transportation . and that the newspaper be full of these hilarious cartoon of the husband go home to he wife naked . and she be outraged , and he explain that he just run into somebody who take he clothes . I have -- they -- they never take my clothes .", "now we be go back to Shargorod . -lsb- pause for 9 seconds -rsb- one very traumatic experience for I be the fact that there be no toilet . and I be shy to begin with , and very prudish , and very -- like , when we have to go to the shvitz , I do not like to undress in the good time . and here I have to do my thing in front of other people in the backyard . and because we be now 60 new people , plus the 4 of they -- 17 I think there be .", "INT : Mrs. Lyon , please continue . GL : we be in this brick factory for four week . and during that time , we have to sleep in little slat -- be under a , under a , under long strip of -- they be not room , they be not house , they be , they be use to dry out the brick . and so there be brick for wall , not necessarily all the way to the , to the top , to the roof . it just have roof , a roof , and it have beam here and there .", "and we would see endless column enter these building and never come out . I work directly behind gas chamber and crematorium , now know as number four . and it do not have a undress dress room . and so we would see the people change , or get undressed -- not change , but get undressed -- in front of the gas chamber and crematorium on the beautiful green lawn , as we pass by they to go to work . we just pass they by , and make a left turn on the other side of the gas chamber and crematorium , and just a few foot , and we be at we work place .", "and so we have to remove the dress . we have to remove he shoe . so we be really -- this time we be totally naked . and I get -- I get so worried , and mother come over and , look some -- in another direction , say , please pretend you know nothing about the diamond . I say , mother , you be go to have to get rid of it , or -- or we be go to lose you .", "for what we do with the clothes in the Kanada work detail , be we package they for shipment to Germany . yes , the german folk wear we clothes from home during World War II . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- now , the clothes that be not fit to be wear , apparently , be cut up in -- into strip about this wide and -- somewhere else , not where I work . maybe in another barrack nearby . and somebody sew up the end .", "maybe in another barrack nearby . and somebody sew up the end . but by the time these strip reach we , they be just pile of -- heap of -- of these thing . we have to twirl they , and we have to braid they , just like hair . we braid -- we braid they .", "and -- and then he just take everything he see , and he -- until there be no more room in my arm . and can you imagine ? in the meantime , we lose quite a few woman among the rest of we , who be take away because we -- because they strip be not as long as my sister 's . so they pull all sort of stunt to thin we out . for example , periodically , Dr. Mengele would appear , and we would have to -- on the pretext of a medical check up -- we would have to remove all we clothes , and in we birthday suit , just sometimes we be ask to turn around .", "INT : then Mengele come . GL : oh , yes . and we have to undress on the pretext of a medical check up . Dr. Mengele ask I to turn around . he notice these pimple , and -- and send I over there .", "but after , I no longer no longer have she magnetism to give I strength , but I will go into that later . here in Auschwitz , we be still together . and one day , we have a selection , again -- we go through -- by this time , I go through a number of Dr. Mengele 's dreaded selection , you know , where he would -- we would have to undress , and he would decide who should live , and who should die . and this time , I , too , be send to the other side , along with 30 other woman and girl . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- we be place in a barrack .", "-lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- we be place in a barrack . and the last time I see -- see my mother be at this scene . naked , in front of Dr. Josef Mengele . and she break down and cry , because I be separate from she . but this time , I be not send to be recover , but I be send to the gas chamber .", "do they pay attention to that number at all ? GL : well , that -- that number remain my number throughout my concentration camp ordeal . strip of cloth be give to we . we have to sew it on , on one side , in front and on the back of we single garment that we own . INT : so that number be relevant throughout you --", "and we all go into he jacuzzi . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and when we be in the jacuzzi on the balcony in San Salito , above San Francisco , you know , on the other side of the bridge , he say to I and Eve , you must excuse my little girl that they be look at you strangely , because you be actually the first people outside the family who be with we in the jacuzzi . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- we be not even naked . they be -- they always go into the jacuzzi naked . but this time , we all have swim trunk .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and when we be in the jacuzzi on the balcony in San Salito , above San Francisco , you know , on the other side of the bridge , he say to I and Eve , you must excuse my little girl that they be look at you strangely , because you be actually the first people outside the family who be with we in the jacuzzi . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- we be not even naked . they be -- they always go into the jacuzzi naked . but this time , we all have swim trunk . so , he -- so I say , jokingly I say , well , Karel , what be the -lsb- speak czech -rsb- ?", "-lsb- pause for 8 seconds -rsb- and then come the selection . INT : what be that like ? MH : and we all have to undress and parade in front of Mengele . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- and he come to I . and he start shout he head off , tell I off , because I have strip like the other boy .", "MH : and we all have to undress and parade in front of Mengele . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- and he come to I . and he start shout he head off , tell I off , because I have strip like the other boy . and he say , how be I suppose to recognize you amongst this -lsb- german -rsb- , this , you know , multitude ? but he recognize I , although I be not in my clothes .", "and I think that be Harry Lowett . we be now work out that we think it be Harry Lowett . but Helmut be -- I remember think that I be not courageous enough to go up to Mengele and say , look , do I have to strip ? I just strip . INT : why do you think you be choose by he ?", "we be now work out that we think it be Harry Lowett . but Helmut be -- I remember think that I be not courageous enough to go up to Mengele and say , look , do I have to strip ? I just strip . INT : why do you think you be choose by he ? MH : well , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- why -- why be 100 boy take out ?", "INT : do you have access as well ? MH : well , they try to talk I into select a girlfriend , and on one of these outing , you know , when we go to sort out clothes , there be 1,000 woman , I do not know , from France stand there . have you ever see 1,000 naked woman ? it be not a very sexy picture . and this -lsb- german -rsb- , he name be Herting -- I live with herting and nitka in the same -- in a sort of office .", "INT : this be something that you be party to . MH : yeah . and he take she off , and she follow he , naked , into a barrack , you know ? and the prisoner have it all arrange , you know ? and we come home that afternoon or evening .", "and the prisoner have it all arrange , you know ? and we come home that afternoon or evening . the woman be keep naked for about five hour . it be just one of these german thing . the clothes be all there .", "and with this rollwagen in the mud , the body would be load , and then they would slither through these , these fence-like leather -- the leather-type side . and the man have to pick they up again and load they again . and now it be the same sort of thing , because somebody would die , he would be strip naked , and he would be throw . and people would grab leg and hand , and two or three swing and then , up , and he would fly . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and the body would fly like a pole vaulter .", "and they put I through a shower . and then they look at I and they say , but you -- you be completely lousy . so they strip the whole bed . and they take all this stuff , put I through a sauna . and by now I have another pair of shoe .", "run up , and say , Hanu he say -- hanu be a abbreviation of my name -- run ! he have my coat . I be naked , except for the -- for the nightie and -- and shoe . throw the coat on top of I . he say , run !", "they be relation , or they be cousin -- I do not enquiry . we be absolutely shock . and they -- I be naked , practically . so -- but they have double -- double sock , and double panties , and double scarf . and -- and so they dress I up , as best as they could .", "one car be bigger . one car be small . and I -- never not undress , nowhere to have a bus . during the day i use to be on the stair of this lady who give I the shelter for two week . and after it she do not want anymore .", "and they be all the time release by the german doctor or whatever . and as I stay in this big , enormous square , and just walk , look at the sky , this blind man appear . this blind man appear without the dog , without this strip , without out the cigarette , but the -lsb- ? blind ? -rsb- with the white stick .", "lb : then my brother and I , we be march into a barrack . and before we -- before we come into that barrack , we go to -- we be march off to a place in front of a -- some sort of barrack , a huge one . we be strip from we clothing , shave all over , and go in to take a bath . when we come out , everyone be hand some sort of a article of clothing -- a pair of pants , some sort of a jacket , a pair of shoe , sometimes two right shoe or two leave shoe , a pair of shoe from two different color , and so on -- just to be able to put on . INT : these be not uniform .", "and I walk up to my waist into the cow shit . they would not let I into the house for two day . I have to undress outside and get -- get all my clothing wash . so that create quite a bit of hilarity how I have walk into the -- into cow shit . never fear .", "fp : one . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and he be take -- and my father be take to the gendarmerie , which be , at that time , the military police . when my father come back , he back be cut like spaghetti strip . and it be not -- I know the doctor come -- you know , the jewish -- a jewish doctor . he be not a doctor , a felcher , which be , in my mind , he practically know everything what a doctor do .", "wl : this maid ? because I do not want to be bath . and naked and I curse . and she clap I in my back . I do again .", "some people , they look at we very interested , what -- what be happen ? because this , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- this camp be only for man . and then they say we , dress out , strip off , and go to shower . shower , of course , everybody not with man . men be separately .", "men be separately . we be separately . we come to this cold shower , undress with we valuable -- valuable thing we leave . probably , they say it will be for to kill some animal . -lsb- laugh -rsb- and , you see , when we leave , we , we receive new dress .", "probably , they say it will be for to kill some animal . -lsb- laugh -rsb- and , you see , when we leave , we , we receive new dress . each be strip on the back with other color , and nothing much , of course . and we look like from circus , but not so important . men be separate , woman separate .", "and we come to , to Ravensbruck -- the same grate with Arbeit , macht macht frei . but this be very , very big campus . first , they take we to shower place , where they have -- they tell we to strip everything . the first day be look for jewelry , which some woman be hide in they hair or gynecological place . each woman be take first to check hair .", "thank God , after a couple day , they take we to Appellplatz . somebody think that this transportation of woman -- this be only for woman , Ravensbruck -- it will be -- be , be go to ammunition factory . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- everybody have to strip . I remember cold , because it be autumn . and in the middle be sit on the chair , a couple civilian man and couple ss man , ss man officer .", "I remember cold , because it be autumn . and in the middle be sit on the chair , a couple civilian man and couple ss man , ss man officer . and they , they let we go around in circle , naked . again , shock for I to be with old woman , with my mother . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- anyway --", "again , shock for I to be with old woman , with my mother . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- anyway -- INT : have you see you mother naked before ? WL : no , never . it be a different time , not , not like now .", "it be a different time , not , not like now . mother be , for I , always very elegant , very clean , very nice person . and later , I see she naked -- shocked . and many woman wound or with some disease . it be also terrible .", "no change of clothes at that stage . and my shoe be completely cut . I wear a new pair of shoe , but they be literally cut into strip by all the debris and the ruin we have to walk over during that time . and I have a sort of anorak . when I see the first tomato , I pick all the tomato I could in sight and stuff they inside the lining of my anorak , which do not do it much good , I can tell you .", "lb : we use to -- to -- to work around . Mengele use to stand near we . naked , we use to work . and they use to see if someone be very , very thin , they use to send to the crematorium . and the first few selection , it be all right .", "so I take my -- I want to take to -- to get dress . no , you be not -- not go to get -- to get dress . you go like this , naked . go to that number seven , block number seven . it be a barracks call number seven .", "we be -- we be -- we have to go to a certain -- to a house , a big house , to take a shower . I think it be every -- every week or every few week . over there , we use to , of course , undress and to go that -- to the shower , take a shower . when I come there , well , a certain ss man come over to I . usually wait -- wait many time , I go through that without any trouble .", "and everyone that leave the ward have to be bath in very antiseptic water , I suppose . and so I be , also . this be the first time that my friend in the ward have perceive I naked . and they see , of course , that I be circumcise . -lsb- whistle -rsb- -lsb- laugh -rsb- absolutely amazing what these child know about foreskin and about the detail of this , that , and the other .", "but I have no idea . they look very miserable to I . they have strip clothing on , and it remind I of prisoner which I have see on -- on television . INT : what procedure do you undergo when you get to Auschwitz ? tm : well , they open the train , couple of wagon .", "I have -- have a chance to go inside and have a look , what it look like . so I would see there be a imitation of washroom . and I have see where they be undress . so I know that be where it happen . I could still smell the gas .", "I do not remember . and when they come , I , I say , I be healthy . no , you have to undress . you have to undress . and they count up 200 or 220 and put you into a unit .", "and when they come , I , I say , I be healthy . no , you have to undress . you have to undress . and they count up 200 or 220 and put you into a unit . and I fall into a unit that be call 104/108 .", "a cousin of mine in north -lsb- inaudible -rsb- give I a -- a -- a necklace chain , a silver chain . I forget it . those that be -- be naked be order to go into another room and to get out the room through a window , not a door . the window be not too high , but you have to get out completely naked . and the reason for that be that they want to make sure that nobody have anything hide in the most intimate place .", "I forget it . those that be -- be naked be order to go into another room and to get out the room through a window , not a door . the window be not too high , but you have to get out completely naked . and the reason for that be that they want to make sure that nobody have anything hide in the most intimate place . I forget to take my -- my silver -- silver chain off .", "we be already in the concentration camp very nice . he take we six girl for two week to get shower , cold shower . we need to take off we clothes and walk naked from the hall to the shower . we use to cover ourself , put the hand on the bust , put one hand to the front . one day , I say to the girl , I say , we can not help that .", "and one girl say , you -- every time , you want to be a big shot . I say , no . I say , walk out straight , naked . he want to watch we naked . he will watch we .", "I say , no . I say , walk out straight , naked . he want to watch we naked . he will watch we . we go to the shower .", "and we stand there for the roll call , and they give we papers -- slip of paper . and they ask we to line up , two by two . and they drive we -- or rather -- I do not call it ` drive , ' when you be be escort -- you be on foot -- to someplace where we have to strip . and man be around -- Gestapo -- look at we , stare at we . we be very , very terribly not only ashamed but I would call it violate , in that way .", "rs : they catch she , and they put she in the big prison in Paris . they put she on a board with nail stick up . and they strap she -- naked -- on that board . and they want she to admit all the people she know . and every time she say no , they would bang she on it .", "that be a short appell . but usually it be sometime maybe one hour , two hour , maybe sometime three hour , sometimes the whole night long . the first Christmas I be there , they put we out naked . it be so cold , because where I -- where Ravensbruck be , it be cold . it be go up towards Russia .", "it be go up towards Russia . and I can tell you it 's real cold . they put we out naked the whole night long . the only thing we could do be to stay , you know , one next to the other to try to get a little bit of warmth , one from I and -- and I from she . for no -- because there be one miss in the whole camp .", "we first Christmas , they hang a man and we have to go and walk around he and look at he while we be -- that be we Christmas tree . Poor man . he be all naked and they hang he on a pole like to make a cross . and they put he arm like -- like -- oh , horrible . we have to look at that .", "you know but few hundred woman undressed . you know , I be twelve , and it be for -- for the first time , this be not a society like now . I have never see a naked woman , and for the first time in my life , I suddenly see a few hundred woman , old and young , everybody naked . they take away you clothes , and they put it -- it be call delousing , you know , and they sterilize it or whatever . and we have to have a good wash , scrub , and later on , they get we back the clothes , and we be give little hut also .", "she say , shh , you father be back . he come that night . Mother strip he in the -- in the yard , in the courtyard totally , then lift he . the man weigh approximately 156 pound , normally . -lsb- sob -rsb- she pick he up like he be a doll and carry he upstairs , let water run in the tub , put he in the tub , wash he , give he a bath , put warm pajamas , and put he in bed , and then run downstairs and spoon soup .", "for she first birthday , my sister buy it for she and give it to she , somewhere for a lot of money , because it be at the Russians . she be 139 . she have they on naked little foot . and be nearly naked , and I grab she underneath I and hold she to myself like this , and want to go out . they grab I all .", "she be 139 . she have they on naked little foot . and be nearly naked , and I grab she underneath I and hold she to myself like this , and want to go out . they grab I all . they hold I .", "it be a door lead to the Chief Gestapo and SS man there . they take she in , and she come back about , from there , about 20 , 25 minute later . and she whole skin and muscle be hang in strip . I have see it , bloody , in strip . they use to beat they up there .", "they take she in , and she come back about , from there , about 20 , 25 minute later . and she whole skin and muscle be hang in strip . I have see it , bloody , in strip . they use to beat they up there . I do not know what they use , some sharp object .", "they use to beat they up there . I do not know what they use , some sharp object . they be -- I have see she skin and muscle hang like strip on the bone . she still live , but she do not cry . she could not cry , maybe .", "once they have something on -- on , they think on I , it be enough to be kill . and I be lucky . then one day , they take I in there , and I think , all right if they kill I , but I do not want to look like this one , you know , with strip of -- if they would beat I like that , I do not know . maybe with razor , how they cut she . I do not know .", "I move slightly around till I do not know what time it be , early in the morning . the door open quickly and they grab I , get I out . as they open the door , I have see a person , a woman , a woman more like a animal , naked , without anything . and I have see the arm stretch out after I to catch I , and I have see -- I look and I have see a -- blood all over she arm and she face . but she live , and it be a person .", "do not know what they -- what rank they have , in they shiny boot with helmet , arm , of course , two on the front , two on the side , and two at the back . and I think of myself , whom be they guard so -- they just guard if someone would run away from this truck . and there be -- it be the middle of winter , very cold , and there be naked child , you could see -- that be what I want from memory to paint , if I can do it -- you could see frozen , and hear scream . because underneath it , all the child , they take out . I can not say exactly how many there be .", "now , what sort of torture ? I do not know what they use there . but I have see a woman come -- and there be many -- just cut on they body , half naked . they take off -- tear off -- they clothes . and the skin be cut .", "it be just airplane come out you ear . just -- it be really a dangerous place to fly . so what they do be they split the squadron up from the various group and move the little airplane to satellite strip , which be what they call they -- satellite strip -- and what it would be would be a big field someplace , where they would put down the steel matting if it be necessary . and we would be -- the 16 airplane , the pilot , and the crew would be -- that would be they base , all within 20 , 30 , 40 mile of Frankfort , 60 top . one of the play -- and this be where I meet a german family that become close , and I have see they a couple of time since the war .", "if you go into a row -- between a row of barracks , andw what -- and there be dead body . you have to step over or around -- or around dead body . usually they be naked . and what have happen , they be people that have die during the night , and the other inmate would just take they outside . and they have a detail of inmate whose job be to go to take these -- gather up these body , and put they in the stack .", "and -- and , um , I never see any meat at Buchenwald . and we go through the warehouse , too . but they have strip -- you see , the ss have split . they leave Buchenwald , pr -- try to get away . and they be mostly capture uh , by the military , by the Americans .", "and it be fill with dead -- with dead people . I mean every car . most of they be naked . some of they have be shoot . there be medic , guy that have the Red Cross on they helmet and on they shoulder , go through these body .", "or we be tell , you know , a couple of day . we be only , you know , 40 mile away . and I take all this flight gear that I have , and I take -- I fly the l5 , go back to the strip , and all these guy be ask I , where the hell -- ? and I do not want to talk to they about this . you know , I say , really , it be the most horrible thing you have ever see .", "that smell like shit ? smell like dead dog , dead -- he say , no , it smell kind of bad , but I do not smell that smell . I say , well , it be kind of -- so I hang it out on the fence there by the -- by the strip , and the next day i go out there and be go to have my uniform press . we have some german woman that we pay they with coffee or something and they would press we uniform for we . and , um -- I still smell -- I say , Louis , do you smell this ?", "beautiful town . beautiful town . and we be just outside of town in a air strip . and we -- we be target for the new radar anti-aircraft gun . so what we -- all we do , we would just fly a course back and forth , and change altitude from they command -- some commander , you know , pick up 1,000 foot , to see -- training these guy how to the use these radar gun .", "they -- once they get they lock onto we , no matter what we do , the gun would follow we , and lead we , and the whole thing . state of the art , after the war . and then we have a demonstration of fire power to -- we strip be locate up on the high ground . and we take off , and we go right over the dp camp at about 500 foot . the dp camp be part of a old castle , I think , and -- because there be a huge building of some kind involve , and a multi-story building .", "or they would lay on the ground with they clothes just crawl with lice . every day , I see open wagon pile high with corpse , with just the arm and the leg dangle over the side , without any dignity . of course , we would be strip of all of we dignity , in life as well as in death . but it be a frightful sight to see every day . and that be what I remember about Bergen-Belsen .", "my dress be full of lice . my hair , my hair be full of other lice , special lice . so then there come the disinfection , yeah , where we be stand naked in front of man , man , take to the bath in front of man . stand -- you know , young girl , naked -- and they be stand and grin at you , worse than the Germans . well , this be all I experience there .", "my hair , my hair be full of other lice , special lice . so then there come the disinfection , yeah , where we be stand naked in front of man , man , take to the bath in front of man . stand -- you know , young girl , naked -- and they be stand and grin at you , worse than the Germans . well , this be all I experience there . and then there come different , different interrogation again , whereby they want I to accuse other people , other people .", "you , you , you get a new , striped uniform , a number , and a new -- a different wardrobe , different , different prison garb . and they take everything away , you know . they strip you naked . so I lose that harmonica . so I start singing .", "and we have the shower and we have hot water system . but when the move start from we home to a jewish house , all this stop . and , and sometimes I be have not a bath , but have a dish full of water and wash myself and a lady , half naked , one of the mother , like , she be have a wash next to I in another dish . so the , the the -- the drop of live standard , it be -- it immediately arise . and from then on , I know I be a jew .", "they take we into a bath section , which be a bath , a huge place with shower recess . but it be not gas shower like the rest of they because I be still alive . but we have to undress . and they take the clothes away from we and come adult , what we call -lsb- speak german -rsb- , or prisoner , or whatever the name be -- who work . they be in kommando .", "simple reason -- in two month , out of the 2,000 , about 1,800 die . and 1,800 die on the way to the work , on the job , on they way to come home , in the nighttime by the kapo and the block altester . tortured , that we have to -- 2 o'clock , they wake we up , and we have to , naked and barefoot , have run on the concrete when the weather be already , let 's say , two or three degree . the lice start eat we . many of they die of fleck typhus .", "and he come in , and he bring a piece of bread , and tell that german guy who be the blockalteste or a kapo who be the meanest thing , a sadist -- a definite sadist because he do thing to we which I do not even think the Germans would ask he to do . he be a german prisoner , of criminal or what . he make we run barefoot at 2 o'clock the night , naked in the block , all of we . then we run back . then he come 4 o'clock up , whatever we be cover with , not much .", "so , so I be go back to Dachau now . -lsb- non-english -rsb- , the wife , be here . so in evening , we be -- get naked , get shower . we get into the block , and we get food . later on , we learn the reason they put we into this section because that be the section for the Red Cross to visit .", "all kind of strange name and thing which we be not use to . or suddenly we see german Jews . Blind people who have a yellow kind of strip with three black circle , which be a sign for a blind people . it be not in Czechoslovakia . and for a child of just bar mitzvah , everything be new .", "so I say , well , it must be a recreation home for soldier or something like that because everyone have a stick in he hand . and I see only , only these soldier . but few minute later , the wagon be open , and the unhuman cry and shout , and people with kind of dress I have never see -- these strip , and with number sew , and all kind of sign , and scream like -- not like human being . raus ! raus !", "now we come still with we clothes and everything . now we have to take off we clothes and put it -- like if somebody come to a prison , if you see it in picture , you have a huge bag , and you put all you belongings into the prison . we have to get naked . and then we could see what be go around . maybe there be another transport , and so on .", "and we be wait . I see some installation for disinfection -- INT : but you be naked ? you have -- yb : we be naked .", "INT : but you be naked ? you have -- yb : we be naked . and we have -- in this winter , we have to wait -- sometimes inside , sometimes outside . the very old people , of course , collapse , and some of they die .", "today they be call different number . and the gas chamber be not underneath , in a cellar , but the same floor . and there be another crematorium , 1 and 2 , which be the more modern one , where the crematorium be underneath and also the room where they have to undress . anyhow , we could know where they -- where they be go . so that be the beginning of the hungarian transport .", "INT : and you be there ? yb : and how do it go ? we go -- we have to be naked . INT : you have to undress ? yb : of course , a number , and again , leave and right .", "yb : and how do it go ? we go -- we have to be naked . INT : you have to undress ? yb : of course , a number , and again , leave and right . and whoever be there , he be tell he can go .", "yb : and remember to put shoe nicely together . you should find everything . and if everyone be naked , they push they further on in the gas chamber . and when everyone be in , they close it with a kind of hook . and then they pour , this ss man pour Zyklon B from above , in the crematorium 1 and 2 .", "there be case , once a transport come , there be a dancer . and they tell I the name be Schelling or something case , ss man . and she be dance when she be half naked or completely naked . and she manage to take he pistol and shoot he . and there be a kind of terribly blood bath .", "they also collect this hair , a tremendous lot of hair . and of course , in the sauna , we little child could go in . and there be stay sometimes a whole transport of 2,000 naked woman , wait at least . I do not know if they go to gas . but they be in the sauna , which mean the have a little chance maybe to go to work .", "I remember some of these child once come to we , and I ask they , from where be you , and what happen to you ? and they say , well , we be just in the gas chamber . we be naked . and then come Schwarzhuber . and the half of the child who be just enter the gas chamber -- say , out .", "INT : prisoner . yb : they be treat in the most cruel way . sometimes the german lead they naked and pour on they cold -- I mean water they be freeze to death and so on . I remember there be a little -- INT : what be the temperature in Mauthausen at that time ?", "I mean , the sleep condition , everything you know . I do not have no shoe . because the shoe I get a Auschwitz -- number , you know , when they undress you and you get a shoe , it be double my size . and eventually , I lose it . I lose it , you know , because it be so big .", "they always say they resettle they . but we know . it be five mile out of town , they take they all , and undress they all , and shoot they all . then the Nazis come with another trick . and they say , we will not touch nobody now .", "after we have the shower , if someone do not have a belt , they give he a belt . and we could not understand it . so -- and then naked we be walk , and we be suppose to go into a Krankenlager . a krankenlager be a hospital . that be in the camp .", "what -- what can I do with myself ? I be think of my diamond . I say to myself , maybe -- because I could see there be some people in those barracks that they have uniform , not naked . they be clean the place , and they be allow to have a uniform . and they be pass on you bread or whatever for the people .", "I do not know what he be go to do , but I have nothing to lose anymore . I -- I could see I be finish . -lsb- pause for 7 seconds -rsb- so at night , I be naked . and he have -- near the gate , he have a room for himself . I go into he , and I start speak to he in German .", "people who -- who be very private and very -- very introverted , they -- they have to go -- they have to -- they go to the toilet among 75 other people . I mean -- I mean , I do not think there be any need to describe the -- the -- the feeling of people , of -- or how they must have feel -- how -- how a person , a grandmother must have feel when -- when -- when the daughter or the grandchild have to help she with -- with she everyday business , which she would not have dream of even talk about , never mind do it in public . or -- so I think the last bit of -- of dignity be just -- be just strip away . INT : how do the people cope with the body ? do -- what happen when the train stop ?", "-lsb- pause for 13 seconds -rsb- I guess what happen next help . it be so intensive and so incredibly alien -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- that it keep I too busy to really try and find out what have happen . and I recall be strip of that pitiful suitcase . on my mind , there be only one thing , that I have she thing . how would she get she thing ?", "but it be not . it be water . and I recall practically laugh , and thinking of all the bizarre , naked body around I , all female . other than my mother , probably , I never see a grown woman naked . and I be very interested .", "it be water . and I recall practically laugh , and thinking of all the bizarre , naked body around I , all female . other than my mother , probably , I never see a grown woman naked . and I be very interested . I be a very curious child .", "and really old , maybe two year old , older than -- than I . so we just walk up together in a give room . there be a bare table there , bare naked table , not woman . and -- and -- and two chair there , and one behind -- one behind the table there . and we just wait a few minute and -- and the door open and somebody walk in , sit behind the table , ask we name .", "ad : no , no . my dear , as soon as -- as soon as -- back here , it be all right . but as soon as we land in -- land in England , well we have to -- have to strip we -- we real name . and we -- and I have about six name by the time I get through this whole -- whole -- whole business . and then , he -- he tell we -- but not -- not in a class , but in the -- how much he talk to other , but for the two of we who he himself pick , well , these be the two -- two -- two -- the two -- two -- top one .", "everybody be smoking in those day . and this be a very grim experience , a beaten army , because that be what they be , terribly bedraggled , many of they with head wound and bandage and so on and so forth , many who have to be help ashore by colleague , many of they with hardly any uniform left . there be quite a lot of -- of top half at least naked soldier come on . and they be so demoralize that I remember they take they steel helmet and they first World War rifle , Lee-Enfields , and throw those into the sea as a sign of disgust and total abjection . and I be light cigarette .", "he be stand up on the roof see that if a fire break out to -- he be tell what to do , you know ? and I -- and there be a air raid on . so I do not undress . I stand with my father on the roof . it be a three or four-story block .", "-lsb- laugh -rsb- it be in complete contradiction to what be go on on the ground . this be about 11 o'clock at night and after the air raid be over , we go into we apartment and we lay down . we have do not undress but we lay down to have a few hour sleep . about 2 o'clock in the morning , there be a bang on the door , on we door and one of my uncle come in , and he say , get up , quick . everybody 's run away .", "and -- but thing change in the ghetto . it be not the same anymore . Rumkowski be strip of a lot of he rights . and the german use to take a more direct interest . they use to come in more often to the factory to --", "otherwise , the person , every person will be x-ray . and if they find -- because we could not have anything on we . it be only what be in the body , because -- we be tell to undress . anyway , so the people that come forward , they , they , we hear they take out -- we , we , we see they be take out . and in the dark we could not see very much because if they take away the torch it be dark .", "in the morning it be bitter cold . we only have the -- I be mix it up a bit . we be take into a place before , and we be tell to undress . and we be give these pajamas with a cap , a striped cap to put on . and from there we be take out and take into this place .", "so we do not know what be happen . we be take into the ghetto , the Theresienstadt ghetto . and we be take into a bath , and as we come into the bath , we undress . and in the middle of -- I keep say bath . it be shower .", "we have to pass examination , of course . I return twice , for examination , from the unit . and I come on the 27 of June , in the late afternoon , back , already as sort of officer , a warrant officer , the highest rank which be a special intelligence strip we have , that we be officer . after three month , we would have be permit to wear the officer uniform . INT : and the part of Poland that border you part of Romania be under whose occupation then ?", "and german soldier be there , officer . and ukrainian militia be there . they tell we -- it be bitter cold -- but still they tell we to undress . and shoe -- I have a pair of Dutch , with wooden , and brown uniform , the camp uniform . my clothes be go I have , that they give we .", "INT : be they selection do with clothes on , or with clothes off , or how be it do ? mm : off . we be completely naked . INT : and who do the selection ? mm : the bartenschlager and a few german woman in uniform .", "I think the serum be not consider safe for child . I be not immunize , but I -- but there be this constant fear in those time that one would get infect . and my mother be -- who be absolutely crazy about hygiene , would always tell when I come home in those day , she would tell I to undress at the entrance and check all my clothes that one do not find any lice because lice be the carrier of the -- of the typhoid . and somehow , she -- we -- we manage to stay ok . somehow we manage to avoid the disease .", "but one do not know what it mean , but it be obvious that they be turn they in order to make film show how the Jews be terribly selfish and how they do not -- be not solidarity with each other and how they be immoral and how they be horrible . they be turn all kind of picture where they be -- of the restaurant where there -- some people be eat , guzzle themselves and beggar die of hunger next to it , precisely . and picture when they be herd man and woman together and tell they to dance and maybe to undress and so on . so all kind of film which have all completely negative tendency . but -- I mean which have a tendency to show how horrible the Jews be .", "and I work there ' 40 -- ' 40 -- that be ' 44 , in the summer of ' 44 . -lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- oh yeah , one day there be a explosion in one of the factory , and people burn . and I see a man come down the road on fire , naked . all -- everything be burn off . and it be the most horrible thing .", "here . a14948 . and then we , we have to go for selection again -- this time nude , completely undress . and we stand in row , and not close together , but so that somebody could walk through the row of woman . so we be this one , this one , this one , this one .", "we be come to Bergen-Belsen . we all be black , like coal . -lsb- pause for 6 seconds -rsb- and they take we to the sauna , to the -- where we have to strip everything . and again , they shave we head . and we have shower .", "and then they march we to a different barrack . inside that barrack , they somehow have organize different part . so we have to undress , and there be two -- I think they be doctor -- they be sit there on a desk . and they be check we over , and so I hear one doctor say to the other , and he say you know -- point at I -- he say look at how he look . he be quite skinny .", "they give we different clothes . they -- we could not get that clothes . they -- we undress in this room , and we go to the other room . they check we over , and then we go this way . and there be secretary sit there , and they be mark down my name and how tall and this and that .", "and the way he like to do it be everybody have to come . even the woman and the girl have to sit , you know , and have to watch it too . and the guy who get the punishment have to undress completely nude , and lay down . and he get five with the rubber -- or 10 , 15 , 20 . and one time , we have two people -- they run away .", "that be why I get my 10 . that -- the same evening , when we come home after supper , my name be call . I have to undress . and I have to lay down on the table . and I get my 10 .", "and that blechhammer must have be between 10 and 40 kilometer long . but it only be maybe one and a half to two kilometer wide . so a long , long strip through a forest , both side be with the evergreen tree . INT : how long do you stay in Blechhammer ? rl : I stay in , I stay in Blechhammer till 1944 in winter .", "we take out everything . they take away everything from there . so we be all naked there . and they say -- -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- then they start to shave we . again , the head , and a stripe in the middle of the head , and they shave we , and the body .", "and then the evening , they take you in -- in the barracks . and at 4:00 o'clock in the morning , they wake you up again out . and they -- they have to go to a washroom there about half naked , and in the cold water . outside , there be some water , wash you a little bit . and you do not have soap , nothing , you know , no anything , no toothpaste , anything like this , you know , nothing .", "they take between 500 and 600 people . and they make the job when they come out from the gas chamber . they have to pull they out from the gas chamber -- they be already naked , anyway -- and put in this crematorium . a crematorium oven , you could not go in more than 25 person at once . as they say , the way I hear -- I see , later , the crematorium -- it take about 20 minute to burn the body .", "he look in every little thing . he ask thousand of question . we be undressed , completely naked . he start to measure we -- the finger , the nail , color of the eye , color of the hair . what be the situation in we family ?", "only Jews , of course . no other one . -lsb- inaudible -rsb- and they -lsb- inaudible -rsb- everybody to stand in line , undress completely , in the open field . and whoever be skinny , he be sick , he be weak , knock out . now let 's say this happen , this selection , let 's say the selection happen , let 's say , Thursday .", "they use -- they electrocute . 12 o'clock , we be finish with the shower . they throw we outside on the snow naked and till morning , 6 o'clock , after a hot shower , hundred there , or thousand , I do not know how many . probably a thousand there , sit -- standing , not sit . there be -- you could not sit on the snow .", "probably a thousand there , sit -- standing , not sit . there be -- you could not sit on the snow . naked , after a hot shower . I do not even know if somebody get to catch a cold . I do not see nobody to sneeze there .", "and for my father , that would have be something disturbing . so I -- I leave my book by a friend , a neighbor girl . and I come in , and then I undress because I wear a uniform . in -lsb- inaudible -rsb- , we have to wear a uniform . and not only uniform , but we have a number on we arm .", "and you and you sister be take to where ? GW : we be take -- we do not know where , to a building . first , we be strip off of everything . I also , something that I will never forget , I take along a souvenir book . it be customary at that time that friend -- it be a beautiful book with dark red Bordeaux velvet cover .", "and that be still fill with body that they have burn up . and on the outside be pile and pile of bone . we see a building there where they give they a cake of soap , strip they , tell they to take a shower , and they turn on the gas , the gas chamber . there be another building where there be woman and child , woman lie on the floor close together , baby , child that look like they be 50 year old , with the bloated tummy from starvation . it be -- it be a horrible , horrible sight .", "you just -- you know , you hurt . it be , you know , they pierce you heart . and after they tattoo , finally they give you that , you know , a clothes that what you wear , that strip -- a striped dress . and I wind up with two wooden shoe , two leave one . INT : two leave wooden shoe .", "no shoe . INT : can you describe what happen the day you arrive in Auschwitz ? hm : well , we be take to a barrack where we be tell , first of all , undress and throw everything on the floor . and I have a girlfriend with I stand next to I who have a very beautiful light beige coat on . and I keep say , Ellie , undress .", "hm : well , we be take to a barrack where we be tell , first of all , undress and throw everything on the floor . and I have a girlfriend with I stand next to I who have a very beautiful light beige coat on . and I keep say , Ellie , undress . come on . she say , be you crazy ?", "so she be nice and she be kind . she give we always , especially I , she give I always a piece of a apple or a piece of bread or something . and all of a sudden , one of the other ss woman find out about it and denounce she , and they strip she and put she in as a prisoner . and she pay very dearly for be nice and try to help , which make I very sad . but there be nothing we could do .", "INT : and that be in about 1938 ? lb : yes , 1938 . the area where I live be a strip of land alongside the Danube . and not only , actually , the entire eastern segment of Czechoslovakia which be , by the way , today Slovakia . and that entire area be annex to Hungary as a deal between Hitler and Horthy , the hungarian regent .", "and there be other restriction . a jew law be pass which be stricter than the jew law pass in Germany . you know , in 1935 , the Nuremberg law be pass which strip the citizenship from the Jews of Germany and other restriction . the hungarian jew law be -- go much further . it -- in 1938 , it be pass , very shortly after occupation .", "well , be very near the border of -- of Czechoslovakia occupy , you see , we be quite -- actually , I must correct what I say earlier , that the entire Slovakia be hand over to Hungary . actually , this do not happen . it be more correct that a strip of land alongside the Danube , the northern bank of the Danube , become Hungary . another part , two-third , actually , remain Slovakia , independent , under the leadership of Tiso , who , by the way , be the Archbishop of Slovakia . and he be a ally of Hitler .", "people suddenly stop look not only like woman , but like people . the facial expression be go . you be naked . and you have no hair . all of a sudden you be shaven .", "we have see people tortured . Prussia be a horrible place , a horrible place . even in Auschwitz , you do not see such naked violence . even though the gas chamber be in Auschwitz , and the crematoria , but you do not see the immediate violence . it be not apparent to you as it be in Prussia .", "and the selection committee stand at this end . Mengele do not do this particular selection -- another doctor and ss man . and we have to line up , naked , as we proceed to the front . and they look we over . if we be not extremely skeletal , and there be no blemish or anything on we body , then they send we out right away .", "she be not go to last too long with this injury . so they send I to the other side of the partition , and I be separate from my mother . so when the selection be over , there be a handful of we who be -- remain naked . we be go to be send to the gas chamber . I do not care where I be be send .", "and we be go to be take out on the other -- the other entrance to the gas chamber . but suddenly , I could not wait any longer because I see that the line be already finish . the naked body be line up and soon it be over . my chance , this be my chance . so I quickly take my dress off .", "my chance , this be my chance . so I quickly take my dress off . I be naked like the other . nobody notice I . I hop over .", "and my father be not yet . and we come to we home . we home be strip . and even the door be remove . everything , it be strip .", "we home be strip . and even the door be remove . everything , it be strip . so we borrow some straw from a neighbor , from a farmer next door who , by the way , be very , very happy to see we , and very shock to see we . they immediately give we some milk to drink .", "everybody should give they the diamond , the gold , all the belongings , what we have . everybody -- we do not have nothing anyway . so we go out naked from there . they give we uniform , special uniform . they dress we up , and they take we to the barracks .", "and that be what we wear . -lsb- backround noise -rsb- we have a -- a -- -lsb- pause for 13 seconds -rsb- okay . we have a -- a belt across we -- we midriff , and a -- a -- a piece of a -- a leather strip across the shoulder . and we have a wooden stick about the size of about a quarter of a meter . and with the handle -- with the -- a -- a rubber handle , a rubber -- rubber - a piece of rubber hold to we hand .", "where they get it from , I do not know . and we use to dig out the people , put it on a stretcher , walk out from the mass grave , where we see -- the grave be dig out in a -lsb- inaudible -rsb- , where the people be preserve to such a degree . they be all naked , but if there be a piece of cloth somewhere , you could see the color of it . you could see mother with they child in they arm . -lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- we have to walk up .", "first when we get there , it be late October , I think . they take we , we -- take we to a big place . we -- everybody have to undress , throw everything away , whatever we bring with we . we go through a -- they check we out . they even check you rectum .", "we go through a -- they check we out . they even check you rectum . and we stand a whole night on the outside , in the drizzling rain , naked , stand and wait , I do not know for what . the next day in the morning , they take we to the shower . first , they shave we again .", "first , they shave we again . they put disinfectant on . and then , naked , they issue we shirt , just long shirt . and they take we to a barrack . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- I do not remember how many hundred of we we be , maybe 500 people in one big room .", "and we run outside . it be already bright because it be summer , 22nd of June , the largest day of the year . and everybody run out almost naked , with , with they underwear . and the bomb be , be fly all over . and airplane -- hundred and hundred of plane be fly to the east .", "and -- but somehow , we stay for about seven , eight day . I find out later on that the first day , they kill 1,800 Jews . they take they , they get they undressed in the main synagogue , and drive they naked to the open pit , and shoot they , the german with the Ukrainians . second , they -- 800 ; the third , 600 ; and so on , and so on . on the eighth day , my father decide we be go to get out of the hiding place to go to the countryside .", "so you be able to retrieve that . and then they shave all we body hair -- but I mean all of it . and we be stand naked , s -- precede -- proceed from the shower through a long corridor , all naked , stark naked . and we be wait there . we do not know for what , but we notice that to the right -- I can see it .", "so truck arrive , great commotion , dog . glare floodlight . and then we see people -- I mean , you could not make out the face , but the people -- naked , be push and herd up on truck and take away . and then , a while later , just a heavy smoke . that be all what be leave of they life .", "and all we be try be to stay together , mother , she sister and i. and fortunately , we manage to do that . and then they give we a new dress -- I be push it , a dress . it have a long strap in front , and in the back that be call -lsb- german -rsb- , which mean escape strip . so it be probably phosphorescent , something like this , so when the person escape then he be be catch and all that . and they give we a coat .", "and he be take out -- it be the group of 12 other people -- take to the killing grounds . but he do not die -- -- the way the other . he refuse to undress , and he just walk away . and they shoot he as he walk . when they bring the clothes back to the camp , he clothes be the only one have blood stain on .", "and some of they tell we that the whole austrian government be there -lsb- german -rsb- , and the austrian government be incarcerate over there . and we be bring into what they call -- -lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- what do you call -- when they quarantine barracks . we be strip naked . and for four day and four night , we be keep naked . I know very few thing that dehumanize you as much as be naked with a large group of people .", "and we be bring into what they call -- -lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- what do you call -- when they quarantine barracks . we be strip naked . and for four day and four night , we be keep naked . I know very few thing that dehumanize you as much as be naked with a large group of people . we would get up in the morning -- the frost be still on the ground -- and we huddle together .", "we be strip naked . and for four day and four night , we be keep naked . I know very few thing that dehumanize you as much as be naked with a large group of people . we would get up in the morning -- the frost be still on the ground -- and we huddle together . we would embrace each other to feed off each other 's warmth .", "while we be in Poland , in the camp , each of we have some personal belongings . we use to hide they and keep they . but once we come to Flossenburg , to Germany , we be strip of everything that we own . all we be give be the striped uniform , the wooden clog , and a metal plate on we -lsb- inaudible -rsb- , into which to receive we food . and the spoon , the handle of it , we would thin out with a rock or something , to serve as a knife .", "he be from Detroit . Slept in the same room with I . when he be undress at night , at the light of the moon , I could see he shine black body . I never see a black person before in my life . he have the bvd , the white shorts .", "es : not -- yeah , I will tell you about it . so I do not know what -- what they be search , but obviously to make we clean , for whatever reason . first , we come in one room , and we be tell , undress completely . keep only you shoe . and suddenly , we be undressed and we be stand , hundred of woman , naked .", "first , we come in one room , and we be tell , undress completely . keep only you shoe . and suddenly , we be undressed and we be stand , hundred of woman , naked . and it be very , very embarrassing , but that be not all . the old timer man and the ss man be walk around with naked woman very naturally .", "and suddenly , we be undressed and we be stand , hundred of woman , naked . and it be very , very embarrassing , but that be not all . the old timer man and the ss man be walk around with naked woman very naturally . of course , later we find out that it be a everyday scene for they , but it be not for we . and we be so embarrassed .", "then we go to the next room , and there be a group of girl -- old timer -- and they be sit on chair . no , they be stand there with chair , and they shave we hair from we head , and other part of the body , too . so here we be , naked , without hair , only with we shoe . then we go to the third part , and we be tell , put you shoe at the wall and go in the middle . and we go in the middle , and we be the lucky one .", "we say here . and he make this -- he head -- and he do not like it . and he go out again , and he come back and bring we straw , so we would not sleep on the naked floor . and then he leave , and we never see he again . he probably leave the village and everything .", "and I be select to the -- to -- to the -- I do not remember whether it be the left or the right -- to one side . it turn out that 67 people out of more than 300 in that whole group be select to live . and the other have to undress , move towards the edge of these hole , and they be shoot down . INT : do you see this ? rw : we see .", "so some -- some have it more better than other , those who be not just -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- dependent on -- on -- on the ration . so in -- in -- in May , I be in a transport , and it turn out to Gross Rosen . in Gross Rosen , after they march we from the train to the camp , we have to undress completely . they be examine we for any valuable . they examine -- they -- they look into the rectum , into the mouth , whether you do not have anything there .", "rw : Right . and then you be distribute these striped clothing . this be the first time that I have strip clothing . INT : and be you give a number ? rw : no number .", "and this be it . during the night , if you want -- you have to get up , to get out to the latrine , the latrine be full of dead people -- stack up . naked -- naked corpse , stack up like wood , one on top of the other , because people be die during the night . and they be pull they out , undress they , put they -- stack they up , because , you know , after a couple of hour , the body get stiff . and they be stack up just like wood , this way and this way .", "during the night , if you want -- you have to get up , to get out to the latrine , the latrine be full of dead people -- stack up . naked -- naked corpse , stack up like wood , one on top of the other , because people be die during the night . and they be pull they out , undress they , put they -- stack they up , because , you know , after a couple of hour , the body get stiff . and they be stack up just like wood , this way and this way . so when you get in during the night , -lsb- INAUDIBLE -rsb- you will -- you will find all these corpse .", "ml : we be about 28 man in a special room call a lazaret or hospital . and one morning , while my brother go to work , they take we out . and take we to a place where we have to undress . and they -- five in a row , with machine gun , they shoot they . and I could see in the front of I , dead body overturn into that pit .", "ml : I do not know if I do it consciously or unconsciously , I do not have to rush . and of course , I start in my on way to chant the Viduy , the prayer for the dead . then when it come out , I take off my jacket , and I have to almost half undress . I say to the kommandant , herr kommandant , -lsb- speak german -rsb- . that mean that I be a singer and I could entertain he if he let I live .", "we come in there . and this be -- I think , this be hell , you know ? we get undressed , naked . and they look we that it -- every place you can look at , you know ? maybe we have something , a valuable .", "and they look we that it -- every place you can look at , you know ? maybe we have something , a valuable . and we stand naked . and then it get dark , and we be hungry , you know ? INT : who be the soldier who be look at you ?", "it get cold . and it be windy . and you stay naked . so everybody want to be in the middle , to warm up , and -- and , you know , to change around . and every time you do make a movement , the guy with the whip hit somebody , you know ?", "INT : the Russians come . AJ : at first you know , it -- it -- it be amazing . there come a little kid , you know , maybe -- maybe -- he look like 12 , maybe he be 15 , on a horse , naked . naked horse , nothing on he , just the -- the -- the mouthpiece , you know , to hold he . you know ?", "AJ : at first you know , it -- it -- it be amazing . there come a little kid , you know , maybe -- maybe -- he look like 12 , maybe he be 15 , on a horse , naked . naked horse , nothing on he , just the -- the -- the mouthpiece , you know , to hold he . you know ? he come in .", "by liquidate I mean they pick everybody up in the ghetto , whoever be there . nobody run away at that particular time no more . they make they undress . they line they up in -- in -- in they grave and just shoot they right across . INT : and that be the way you baby sister and you grandmother --", "between the dead -- somebody 's come out from between the dead . so they be run over there , and they take I out . and I be already strip from my shoe . I do not have no shoe . I have shoe with -- with wood .", "I have a jacket -- a striped jacket . it be go . I be practically naked , lie around there . they take I up , put I away in the -- this be March , in 1945 , March . and I be lie there , and I start -- I be lie , I remember , still , cry , cry , cry -- nothing else but cry .", "scream , yell , rouse . and we walk up of a -- up a mountain to a concentration camp call Buchenwald . when we arrive in Buchenwald , we have to undress . First of all , I forget , all the time in Birkenau , we be full with lice . Whenever we have time , we be stand and kill the lice .", "Whenever we have time , we be stand and kill the lice . but when we come to Buchenwald , we have to take off all we clothes . we stand the whole night outside for the disinfection , naked . in Buchenwald , in January 1945 , in snow , in cold weather , a whole night naked . till they put -- take we in in a room , they put we in Lysol water , shave we , the whole body .", "but when we come to Buchenwald , we have to take off all we clothes . we stand the whole night outside for the disinfection , naked . in Buchenwald , in January 1945 , in snow , in cold weather , a whole night naked . till they put -- take we in in a room , they put we in Lysol water , shave we , the whole body . shave we , and we get clothes , and we get a piece of bread .", "I -- I -- I do not know . I be scare to death , but I think the doctor finally realize and just leave I alone . and then we go outside , and we stand around naked for the rest of the day . INT : be it cold ? MH : no , it be -- it be -- the sun be out .", "I be not , because I be go to see my mother later and my father be stand right behind I with a group of man . we be take into these shower . and the first thing they do be , of course , we have to strip . we have to take all we clothes off , which be the first traumatic experience , because you 18-year-old of 1944 be probably a lot younger than you 18-year-old of 1990s . walk among those stare prisoner and ss soldier naked be pretty traumatic at that point .", "and the first thing they do be , of course , we have to strip . we have to take all we clothes off , which be the first traumatic experience , because you 18-year-old of 1944 be probably a lot younger than you 18-year-old of 1990s . walk among those stare prisoner and ss soldier naked be pretty traumatic at that point . we head be shave . and I do remember this .", "it be like little red spot mainly around my side , on my side of my stomach , and I just happen to have a couple when we be last check out . Mengele check we out before we leave . naked , of course . everybody . and my cousin tell I to tell he if he stop I that I do get these every time I eat -- we be give some kind of a cheese sometime -- some kind of a very sharp cheese -- and to tell he that I get it from cheese , which be not true , because it have no connection .", "later , when we be in the wood , one join we -- a man who be one of the people who fall in , but he be not kill . and it take he four day to come out of this hole where he be cover with people . after four day , naked he come out , and he come to we group in the wood . well , this be , in Rzeszow , four action . they liquidate --", "and we run away in the big snow , 3 -- 3-feet-high snow . 20 degree below zero . we be naked -- without shoe . INT : you must have be bleed . ns : only -- I do not know anything .", "but you know , you could not have that feeling if you have not get you own . and I -- you know , those , those scene , that be unforgettable scene . and then they use to take a barrack , whoever be incapable to work , they put they in a barrack naked . they do not feed they at all . and when they have a chance to put they in crematorium , you see if a crematorium ever get open , you know , that -- for some reason or another , they do not have to fulfill , they have a chance to get in , they , they take all those people in .", "and he start tell we these story that they pick he up in the ghetto , and they take he to Treblinka . and he tell we that be -- they be exterminate Jews in Treblinka , whole trainload full . they use to strip they naked . and they drive they into those chamber -- gas chamber . and then they -- he be one of the one that use to take out the gold tooth and , and the jewelry , thing like that .", "I go through that gate . they drive we through it . and they make we strip completely naked and hold we hand to show that we have all we finger . and then Dr. Mengele be stand there . INT : how do you know he be Dr. Mengele ?", "but from what I hear , the description now -- there be a young , tall , good-looking , handsome guy , brunette , you know . so it must have be he , you know . and he -- we use to run back and forth , man and woman , naked , you know . and he would tell you , go this way or this way , this way or this way . and , you know , I be -- like I say , I be athletic .", "and I use to cut out -- we use to cut out hole for the arm and for the neck . and we would slip it -- shake it out good and slip it under we clothing . and also , I would take the cement -- the bag -- and cut it out in strip and wrap up we leg and we torso , you know , to keep the wind out . INT : do it help ? JA : it help a lot .", "they be killer . they be -lsb- german -rsb- , they use to call they . they be -- they have wooden sole and leather -- just leather thong on top -- strip on top , you know , to hold they . or there -- they be all , you know , like , close on top , you know . and -- but it be wooden , wooden sole .", "there be no tree that I can remember , no walkway , no flower . matter of fact , when the one patient bring flower , I could not imagine where in the world he could have get they from . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- just everything strip to its barest . and even the uniform be a black and white or a off-white and dark color . everything be pale and black .", "here again , my father say , do it , whatever you think be right . -lsb- sob -rsb- so , as we be stay and the door be close in the cattle car , people become very hot . they start to undress themselves . matter of fact , I undress myself , too . not -- not bottomless but topless .", "-lsb- sob -rsb- so , as we be stay and the door be close in the cattle car , people become very hot . they start to undress themselves . matter of fact , I undress myself , too . not -- not bottomless but topless . and people be start to die .", "INT : so what do people do in the ghetto ? jl : the best they could under the circumstance , you know ? but if you be -- be 10 people to a small apartment , and some of they be not even related , you do not free -- feel free to undress yourself and -- and wash yourself . you do not get the privacy or something . so they just -- it be a lot of superficial , the best under the circumstance .", "pit be dig -- people to be execute . and I must say here that he bring a lot of outside people in -- a lot of polish people in -- political prisoner and so forth -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . they have to -- they have to strip . they have to jump into the pit . they be shoot .", "the prisoner have to do the beating . there be prisoner of all country there . we be strip right away . we have to strip . we have to stand on a large assembly place .", "there be prisoner of all country there . we be strip right away . we have to strip . we have to stand on a large assembly place . it be October -- the end of October .", "and -- INT : what exactly would they do ? would they strip you down ? RZ : not strip , just bent over a stool and lash you in the back , on you buttock . INT : on you bare buttock .", "INT : what exactly would they do ? would they strip you down ? RZ : not strip , just bent over a stool and lash you in the back , on you buttock . INT : on you bare buttock . RZ : not on the bare , no .", "so that be -- that be one instance . but the worst thing be to -- they use to give we a shower . and then , naked , we have to stand in the snow in Appel , and -- and count we . so you can imagine how many survive . INT : -lsb- sigh -rsb-", "so and this -lsb- non-english -rsb- day and night , all the time , all the time . and the worst thing be wintertime . and they make sure that you be completely naked after whenever they give you the shot . and they send you to stand there for hour . INT : naked in the snow for hour ?", "and they make sure that you be completely naked after whenever they give you the shot . and they send you to stand there for hour . INT : naked in the snow for hour ? ph : naked in the snow , yes . INT : for hour ?", "and they send you to stand there for hour . INT : naked in the snow for hour ? ph : naked in the snow , yes . INT : for hour ? ph : yes , well , it seem like hour .", "and whatever , as I say , all he inventory , even though they give we -- it be like a pittance and barely anything , you know , of when -- what be sell in the store , but at least there be something that he be able to get . but on the 10th of November there be nothing leave . after that , it be -- the mob just walk in the -- I mean , they come in the front door , rip all the clothing , everything , away , strip the store bare , and run . and nobody say anything . I mean , you be just -- there be a jewish star on the front of the store , and this be -- that be a -- a jewish business , Jude .", "JG : they give we those clothes , you know , with the line . and we have to pass through the street -- you know , I mean , not the street . it be inside the camp -- naked or not naked . it do not matter . INT : be there any civilian there ?", "open up right away ! I jump out from the bathtub and open up . I be naked . Came in a big woman and look at I . who be you ?", "Ricardo Klement . we feel , oy vey , you know ? do not feel so good , even with it be not true , but -- and then , we undress he . and we know that he have a -- the number under he arm . it be erase .", "so I come to Pawiak , to the prison , with the money , and with the same story , over there , again -- hand to hold on the wall -- hand hold -- if I have any gun , a -- a knife , any -- anything on I , if I be clean . I be clean . they take I to a small room to undress , because I have to get a shower . and my clothing go into the steam , to -- and lousing . you know , there should not be anything on they .", "you know , there should not be anything on they . but the shoe , the leather shoe , they do not take , because they can not take . so now , a ukrainian stay on I , behind I , and undress everything . I take off my coat , and I take off my jacket . I be already in my shirt .", "well , this place , Guzar , it be a field . there be no woman , just man . they undress in the open air . it be hot , very hot over there . they undress all the man , put they in a line , and they -- and that be the examination , the medical examination for the polish people .", "they undress in the open air . it be hot , very hot over there . they undress all the man , put they in a line , and they -- and that be the examination , the medical examination for the polish people . when they see -- the Jews they could recognize , because they be circumcise . and the polish people be not .", "in very short time , we look exactly the same . we be order into a very big barrack full of soldier , like all the time . again , yell , undress very fast . well , we just look at each other . how can you undress in front of so many stranger ?", "again , yell , undress very fast . well , we just look at each other . how can you undress in front of so many stranger ? well , of course , it be no time to ask there any question . in no time , we be undressed .", "and the people -- some of they be not even shoot fatally . just throw they in the river , and they throw the child live into the river . and they have to be all naked . they take all they clothes off . and they take all the clothes and donate it for the Sudetendeutsche who have to flee the Russians .", "Raus , raus , raus . fast , fast , fast . so we be -- get to a -- to a place -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- where we have to undress . undress completely . we have to stay naked .", "fast , fast , fast . so we be -- get to a -- to a place -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- where we have to undress . undress completely . we have to stay naked . naked , in row .", "so we be -- get to a -- to a place -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- where we have to undress . undress completely . we have to stay naked . naked , in row . you know , we have among we very , very religious , nice , young woman or girl , you know .", "undress completely . we have to stay naked . naked , in row . you know , we have among we very , very religious , nice , young woman or girl , you know . and they have to see the man be among we , go and come .", "then , it be the so-called blocksperre , when the -- when the barrack be close -- all the barracks . nobody could get out . and then , we have to undress -- naked , completely naked -- and go one by one . the -- the -- the german doctor stand by the barrack door -- out . and he look at we .", "and that be the other girl . oh , I have to remember thing . when -- when we have to undress -- I be go back now a little bit -- there be also a young girl . she have a -- she have a little package in she hand . and that be she insulin .", "anyway , we get marry . it be hard time , in the beginning -- we do not have nothing , just nothing , absolute . because , we come -- he come home naked . I come home naked . we have we house , actually .", "it be hard time , in the beginning -- we do not have nothing , just nothing , absolute . because , we come -- he come home naked . I come home naked . we have we house , actually . but after the war , there be such a inflation , nothing be worth anything .", "that be all , because that be all you want over there , just food . because that be very terrible . and so we would be work there , and many a time when we be walk , we would meet truckload of naked girl who be drive -- or man -- ride to the crematorium . and by this time , we know what it be and what be go on . we learn very , very fast the living condition , what we come to .", "when we arrive , they take away all you clothes , so you could not even hide anything . and they check you body inside and out , and they cut you hair and take you glass away and take you shoe away . you be completely naked . and -- INT : be there anything else you remember from the train , do -- from the -- from the journey ?", "then they take we into the barracks . before the barracks , they take we into the bath . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- a huge -- a huge room , a huge barrack kind of room , where they say , everybody undress , take everything off . whatever you have , valuable , if you have valuable , this be the time to give it , because if we find it on you , you be dead . so they would kill , if they find somebody -- somebody 's stick a gold coin in he rectum , they would look into the rectum .", "10 minute later , I leave they there with the shoe . you have to pile everything separately , the shoe separately , you valise separately , you glass separately , everything separate . and you undress completely , and they check you out . and then they take you to a bath where they disinfect you . then you have to emerge yourself underneath .", "we be sleep three floor , one over the other . no separation between man and woman , one near the other , in we dress . you could not undress . when you have to go out , it be a big story to go out -- walk out from there . and one Friday night , the ship , near Greece , be turn in a turmoil -- in a turm -- what do you call it ?", "that must have be the middle part of 1943 . and the worst part of it all be not that they be just take away . there be a -lsb- non-english -rsb- , a sort station for clothes in the ghetto where , once they would take the people to Rumbula , which be the place where they would kill 'em -- shoot 'em , they would undress they , or have to undress themselves . and they would bring the clothes back . and the clothes , then , be sort in this sort station in the ghetto .", "and that particular day , when my aunt be take , my Aunt Flora have a note in she pocket -- who she be ; somehow , some kinda -- kind of identity . and that night , someone come to I and tell I that the clothes off Aunt Flora have come back on that truck where she have be take out to the -lsb- non-english -rsb- . needless to say , we know by then what be happen -- take people out , and have they undress themselves ; take they out to mass grave and shot 'em . Riga do not have extermination or crematoria . it be still in the begin stage of the era .", "the -- the -- the people be undressed , stack like wood -- like cord of wood , you know , like go across each other , head to foot , and so on . and I remember this be -- there be one of the people I just see on side of they be a woman . it be always stick in my mind , this be the first time I see a naked woman be a bloody body . anyway , we go down . but as we be go down , there be the wheelbarrow full of clothing .", "because everybody have diarrhea . they could never make it to any place to a -- to a toilet , or anything like this . so all of we have no pants , except to strip off , maybe somebody off a dead person , if it be clean . this be sort of the photograph today . I forget all about this until I see the picture .", "you know , in the civilian camp -- in civilian camp , when I be there , I could keep , you know , thing with I , picture , or anything . you know . but when I come to Auschwitz , you know , I be strip of everything . and they give you that uniform , that strip uniform , that be it . so when I be in -- in the dp camp after the war , you know , people start find out , and write , you know , I will see you , and another thing .", "you know . but when I come to Auschwitz , you know , I be strip of everything . and they give you that uniform , that strip uniform , that be it . so when I be in -- in the dp camp after the war , you know , people start find out , and write , you know , I will see you , and another thing . and -- and I believe Red Cross come in we camp and want to know , you know , we have any relative some place , you know .", "I be not go to waste a bullet on you . and he have I come out there . now he have I undress naked . I undress naked . he take my uniform and he start feel up to see whether I do not have something hide in there , you know .", "and he have I come out there . now he have I undress naked . I undress naked . he take my uniform and he start feel up to see whether I do not have something hide in there , you know . and he feel something .", "finally , someone open a window . and we sit there like this almost all night . and then early in the morning they have -- they take we to a room where they have a bunch of shoe , a bunch of shirt , and we have to run very fast to grab shoe and to grab shirt , because we be naked sit there . grab shoe , grab shirt . because the uniform we have from Krakow be take away .", "BR : ok . I take my little sweater . I tear off from the half , half and half , and I put it on my shoe -- on my foot because I be naked . I be just like that . and I go up .", "so I go on the field , the field that be about three kilometer from the wood where I want to go , or four kilometer . INT : let I just ask you one question . you say you be naked . but do you mean that you be shoeless , or be you naked ? BR : No .", "INT : let I just ask you one question . you say you be naked . but do you mean that you be shoeless , or be you naked ? BR : No . not naked .", "but do you mean that you be shoeless , or be you naked ? BR : No . not naked . just without shoe . INT : ok .", "but before we have a shower -- -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- -- there be -- I can not tell you how many , because I would tell a huge lie -- but lot and lot and lot of german ss soldier , lot and lot of jewish worker stand around -- man , of course . by this time we be all woman -- we be woman , but there be all these man around . and they be we be tell to strip . we say , strip ? but there be people !", "by this time we be all woman -- we be woman , but there be all these man around . and they be we be tell to strip . we say , strip ? but there be people ! and , of course , the answer to that would have be a huge whack on the head or whatever .", "but there be people ! and , of course , the answer to that would have be a huge whack on the head or whatever . so we have to strip . so we strip . now , I be unfortunate enough to be immediately sexually assault .", "and , of course , the answer to that would have be a huge whack on the head or whatever . so we have to strip . so we strip . now , I be unfortunate enough to be immediately sexually assault . when I say sexually assault , do not think that that mean a actual sexual intercourse , because no .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- no , I do not think I have . but there it be . anyway , so we have to -- we be on -- we be stand around there naked , and the next thing that happen be that we be shaven . now , once hair be off , and I be look for my sister , and I could not see she . the fact that she be stand right next to I , I do not recognize she -- absolutely off .", "and this be the second miracle . there be a transport -- well , because there be -- there where selection all the time . and this particular selection , we have to undress . mostly you have to undress . in this particular selection , we certainly have to undress .", "there be a transport -- well , because there be -- there where selection all the time . and this particular selection , we have to undress . mostly you have to undress . in this particular selection , we certainly have to undress . and only very few healthy , good-looking young woman be pick .", "and this particular selection , we have to undress . mostly you have to undress . in this particular selection , we certainly have to undress . and only very few healthy , good-looking young woman be pick . and my sister and I be one of they .", "we just break the line and run . and we run into -- among the -- the -- the whole lot of people who be line up for the search . we throw we clothes off , because the other be already -- already naked . and in the meantime , this girl be beat to death . she die right there .", "there be about 400 people downstairs and 600 people upstairs . and they bring we in there . and we have to , we have to undress all we clothes . and they send so-called barber in there that shave we hair , shave it completely down , all the hair on the entire body . and then another crew come in and put number on we arm .", "there be also a section in the factory there where they manufacture the shell for this -- for this spark plug . and that -- that shell have to be draw in a -- from a -- from a hot furnace , red . there be people work there without shirt , naked -- half-naked -- with huge tong . they would pick up this metal , put it in there , and then take it out . it be very hard work .", "INT : be you able to keep anything ? rm : nothing . we have to undress and just go through naked , just like the mother have I . INT : be this where you separate from you father ? rm : yeah , when they make the selection .", "I still hear they in my ear . I have to sort -- I have to assort the clothing . and they -- when these people go through the selection , I have to -- they have to be naked . and I have to assort the clothing from one pile of child 's clothes , one pile of woman 's clothes , one pile of man 's clothes . we have to make bundle .", "I still remember she name , Fraulein Opalla . my boss bring a letter that it be require as I work and help in the kitchen , I should go through a doctor 's check-up , if I be healthy . and here , I get the number , and I be go to undress by the doctor . he will see who I be . and I be terribly afraid of this .", "so I find a pair of tefillin and I cut the leather off and use it for a belt for a few week , until I get a belt in Germany . INT : would you pants not stay up without the belt ? JU : no , those prison -- they be give we strip prison pants . and they -- INT : but they do not have elastic or anything ?", "JU : on the striped , yeah . INT : -- uniform . JU : and winter -- before winter , we be give some longer coat , also strip but very thin . and the wind could blow through . the only thing -- we get long pants .", "and that barrack which we reassign be a empty barrack with shelf and -- to house cable and , and stuff . and the two german who be in charge of that barrack only belong to the Todt Organization , which have a different uniform from the army . it be -lsb- inaudible -rsb- with a swastika on the red armband , and on a wide strip , write Todt Organization , which be the -- INT : how do you -- JU : -- same military organization .", "and he arrange that that , that hot day , we could swim . after the Appell , they tell we , you can leave you clothing on the spot where you stand . and naked , we can walk out , march out outside the camp . only a hundred meter past the guard ' barracks , be a big excavation of sand for a -- for a building company . I think it be call Moll , M-O double L. and -lsb- german -rsb- and -lsb- german -rsb- , the two of they , they both be excavate sand for big construction in BMW .", "so I go in the line . people stand without clothing . naked . when you see there the naked people , so you be go already , oh , to the crematorium where they be go to kill you . INT : you know that ?", "people stand without clothing . naked . when you see there the naked people , so you be go already , oh , to the crematorium where they be go to kill you . INT : you know that ? you know that already ?", "so I be tired and without shoe I be go like this . so they take out the shoe from I in -lsb- non-english -rsb- and they tell I to run in snow on the appellplatz . INT : Naked ? nf : naked . 10 time .", "so they take out the shoe from I in -lsb- non-english -rsb- and they tell I to run in snow on the appellplatz . INT : Naked ? nf : naked . 10 time . so I -- I figure out I be go to run the whole night , and I live through that hell .", "and then he tell they to -- to take out the -- the -- to take out the -- the -- the -lsb- non-english -rsb- . you know what I mean ? some word be -- all the -- the -lsb- non-english -rsb- -- naked . and he start they one after one . and one he get .", "and I could walk . I -- I come and I find it -- I see somebody over there . she be all naked . breast be cut in piece . she be such a beautiful lady with color black on the hair .", "and -- and they put all these thing in , include gold tooth , whatever be remove . you know . and then they be give a -- they be all stark naked , they be take to shovel , and they be to dig a mass grave . when this be do , they be force to face the ditch , and they be shoot in the back into the ditch . one man manage to climb out .", "even if the ditch be six foot tall , whatever , he could still manage to climb up and come out of the -- and come out of the grave . my cousin 's father be among they but he be not shoot . there be woman also stand naked , but somehow , they do not kill the woman at that point . there be stand -- there be woman stand . he hide among the woman , and this be how he go away -- go away with they , my uncle Joseph , the one who be with my father in the picture .", "I be a slave , and I want to be with my -- with my friend . they be already up on the barrack , up on the hill , you know , the other people . and we he tell to take off we clothes , strip ourselves to nakedness . so he see the body with the lice . we look -lsb- yiddish -rsb- .", "here I recognize the commandant that -- that tortured I . I buy the picture . this be inside the gate where I be strip to nakedness and -- and beat to death -- 1/2 dead . these be the crematorium that people be -- you know . before they be burn , they be take into a room where they be strip of the gold tooth and everything .", "this be inside the gate where I be strip to nakedness and -- and beat to death -- 1/2 dead . these be the crematorium that people be -- you know . before they be burn , they be take into a room where they be strip of the gold tooth and everything . and then they be burn in the crematorium . this be my husband with this -- at the site of the crematoria .", "do not know that it be Birkenau , but learn it subsequently . what happen there -- first , we be take into a huge hall , which be the shower . but prior to that , we be strip naked , and we hair shear everywhere -- pubic , everything . I remember the yell . at this point , there be german female guard call Aufseherinnens -- husky , blonde , brunhilde scream , yell , whipping with whip .", "the whip be in they hand . and I remember the one thing I be not go to let go of be my baccalaureate diploma , and it be in a green sort of a book . stripped naked , shear , and I be cling to it just like that . and a Aufseherinnen see that , and she just rip it out of my hand , and it fly on the floor . somebody pick it up , and it be in the garbage pile .", "and a Aufseherinnen see that , and she just rip it out of my hand , and it fly on the floor . somebody pick it up , and it be in the garbage pile . and I begin to just cry , sob , and it be partly the baccalaureate diploma , because I believe that underneath , without be conscious of that , I feel this be the last strip away of my identity . if they be take this away from I as well , I be alone . I have be separate from my family .", "but we do not know , the first couple day , we do not know , really , what be go on , because we be select to go to labor . so I wait there a whole night . that day that we arrive , they tell we to undress and take a shower . and after the shower , they give we suit that look like pajamas , pajamas that I have today , that be the pajamas . that be the suit that we have .", "pp : yes , yes . INT : In -- clothe in uniform as well ? pp : no , they be strip . INT : Stripped ? pp : yes .", "pp : up just after we cross the Rhine . and one -- I -- you know , we search the prisoner always . and this prisoner have a picture , a picture of a naked woman , nude woman , run across a area with a group of german soldier stand up laugh as she be run . it be a picture . and she be run toward what I now would identify as a crematorium .", "-lsb- laugh -rsb- and anyway , so we -- they give we -- they give we a whole book of description of german war criminal and -- that we be to look for . they give we all kind of tattoo and all kind of thing they know about these people , and that we be try to find they . and so we be -- and we be to strip search everybody we see . and I say , woman and -- he say , anybody , you strip search . just be sure they have no contraband , no war contraband .", "they give we all kind of tattoo and all kind of thing they know about these people , and that we be try to find they . and so we be -- and we be to strip search everybody we see . and I say , woman and -- he say , anybody , you strip search . just be sure they have no contraband , no war contraband . and that if you find anything , you -- you -- you log it , you put it down , you describe it , you put in these box and send it back to we .", "and she fall down . in mid September , she have only a little smock on . she be naked underneath . and as she fall , the whole smock fall away . and there she be naked .", "she be naked underneath . and as she fall , the whole smock fall away . and there she be naked . I get such a scare , I drop my bread and my pate . because I think .", "I already have the feeling I will never see my thing again . and then we be again hoard into some big hall and tell to , to watch out that we leave every -- all we clothes together , that we will find it easily . and when I -- when I undress , I have a little photo of Goldie and a silver Buddha . and I think , no , I would -- I better take that with I , you know ? so I go into the shower with all my other friend , and we do not know that the shower can be gas chamber .", "nobody know about Auschwitz . so after we be shower , we never go back where we clothes be . we go out on the other side naked in September , wet , naked . then we be give little -- one piece of cloth like , let 's say , like a waitress uniform or something and those dutch shoe that the dutch people , the country people , wear . and then we be hoard into this big barrack .", "sj : well , it be utterly , utterly unreal . it be like if you see a spooky movie , and , and , and I have the feeling at time that I be just look in , that it be not happen , that it be a nightmare or , or , or , or some movie or -- it be just so utterly , utterly unreal . because the people -- I mean , all the time somebody come into the barracks , and we have to strip naked , and we have to stand for hour naked , and the band be go around play . and when we go to the latrine , the , the guy that be suppose to be murderer -- because we be tell if it be a , a , a red triangle or whatever -- so they be in charge of we . and there we be sit on the latrine with the maggot in , in -- lower -- ugh .", "and they come all run out , look we over . and there be this one poor fellow . he be totally naked , have a bandaged penis and a belt around he waist . and in the belt he have a spoon . and he be not czech or german .", "and then they chase they out into the yard -- INT : with no clothes . es : -- naked . and of course , she get pneumonia . and fortunately , she die very quickly .", "I get a man 's shirt , have no button on it . and I feel terrible , ashamed , humiliate . I feel naked . I be naked . and I look around .", "and I feel terrible , ashamed , humiliate . I feel naked . I be naked . and I look around . everybody be bald .", "so each time , you have something different clothes on you . first time , I get a man 's shirt . and I be naked . next time , I get something else . I do not even remember what .", "I put about five or six clothes on myself in seconds . and when I come back to , to the camp , I give it to my friend and even one lady who , whom I do not know . she be almost completely naked . and that be a long skirt , button the front . I remember that because she say I save she life with that .", "and we arrive at Buchenwald , after two and a half day , almost three day . in Buchenwald , naturally , we be take from the station and bus -- not on bus -- on -- on truck into the Camp Buchenwald . and there , we be again strip from head to toe , shaven from head -- all over , from head to toe , shaven . and then we have to go and take a shower . and then you have to go through a line where you would get you nice gray and blue uniform , the prisoner 's uniform .", "it be -- the frost be 30 -- 35 Celsius degree . it be so windy . and I be almost naked -- you know , in rag . I be dress in rag . even the shoe be so rip , I should wrap they in rag to -- to go .", "she let it run away , because the Germans , if they catch it on you body , a chicken or whatever it be , you do not stand a chance to be a survivor . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and people use to be scare to smuggle in thing . the german use to undress you and search you for a potato or a piece of baloney , or any -- any food stuff . and if you be catch , they use to take you away , and they never see you again . we people never see these people again .", "there be no air . and everybody be perspire , and it be so hot . the woman be sit half-naked , excuse I , we be sit naked or half-naked . there be no food leave , no water , nothing . so there be a meeting , the guy in charge , that we should go back through the oven and sit down the bench -- not bench -- bench , bunk , before you get undressed , to sit down and catch fresh air , and we will come in .", "-lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- and as we disembark the train , we have to go through the gate . you have to take off you civilian clothing . they give you strip clothing , blue and white stripe , no underwear , and they give you wood shoe . the sole be thick wood sole and material , like a military -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . it be a hard material and shoelace if you have any .", "before -- before we change the clothing , they check the men , examine they , whatever it be . they look for gold , for jewelry , diamond , and this . anyway , I get dress in my blue and white strip , gray stripe . and I -lsb- ? go in ? -rsb-", "and people die by the hundred in the camp . and you camp , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- new -- new -- new arrive -- new inmate to the camp , Hungarians dress with fur coat , with jewelry , with everything , with the suitcase , with they belongings . they be strip of everything . and this be 1944 , ' 45 . this be then when Germany have trouble with Hungarians , with the hungarian government .", "for four year , we take it gradually . but for they , it be the biggest surprise . they be strip of they dignity , and they endure really big hardship . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- they hair be shave , and the same -- they have the same treatment as we have . and they go to go to different work place .", "so first , we do not have anything because we be not allow to . and then I say , that be , that be impossible . and then we go to Auschwitz where they tell we to strip naked , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- -lsb- sigh -rsb- leave the clothes where you be and move over . we be completely naked . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and while we be stand , the Nazis come .", "and then I say , that be , that be impossible . and then we go to Auschwitz where they tell we to strip naked , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- -lsb- sigh -rsb- leave the clothes where you be and move over . we be completely naked . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and while we be stand , the Nazis come . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- -lsb- background noise -rsb- and there be some attractive , young , good-looking girl .", "we never know the name of the place . they never tell we . they just march we there -lsb- inaudible -rsb- and then strip that piece of rag that you have on and , and put it in , in to delouse it because we be full with lice . it do not matter if you keep to yourself or you go to shower , but if you next -- the person next to you do not , so you -- a couple hour later , you have it again . so there be no , no warm shower or anything that you run into .", "people would bring toy for the child . and I would say , you have to return it . I be too extreme , but I be still glad I have never -- I have always say to my child , I be strip of everything in life . my self-respect be the only thing that I have leave and my pride . never take a nickel .", "so I be save it . it be brand new from home , and the Americans be burn it eventually . now we be DDT 'd , which mean that we have to be naked and lift up we arm and so underneath we -- the lice underneath we arm , in the armpit could be kill . and we be wipe all over front and back and then we be give some kind of clothing . no shirt , just pants and a kind of a jacket .", "and we do not know which -- we be think -- first , we see the water , then we be think they will throw we in the water . then we see the fire , and we be think they will burn we there . and then we be think maybe we should undress and , well , you know , we have get we coat -- something warm -- on . well , we be just sit there and wait , and just like -- like dead people . then they -- they come , and they start to knock , out !", "it be -- I get long hair when I be there , and I always be -- still get two or three hair . I be imagine how long my hair be . without hair , they ask we undress . we undress . naked .", "I be imagine how long my hair be . without hair , they ask we undress . we undress . naked . they take we in shower , naked .", "without hair , they ask we undress . we undress . naked . they take we in shower , naked . it be go all like this .", "we undress . naked . they take we in shower , naked . it be go all like this . I be -- and then from the shower , they -- they count we , how many , somebody do not run away .", "it be go all like this . I be -- and then from the shower , they -- they count we , how many , somebody do not run away . and I be stand like this while I be naked , and he come with a stick and beat I up on the back , the ss there . then I be stand already straight . I could not stand straight .", "I say , what be the mountain there ? when my -- when my eye get use to the darkness , it be a mountain of corpse , dead jewish people . Young , old , child , naked , undressed be lie one on top of the other one . at last , we be sit down in the mud and in the dirt . I see a young girl be hold something cover .", "sometimes the -- what standing at the gate , he use -- he realize that I have some wood , something hide . he do not pay any attention . some -- one of they -lsb- inaudible -rsb- , and he open that piece of rag , see the piece of wood tie to my naked body . he use to tear it off together with my skin . this be the life in Bershad .", "we do not have any washroom , so we have to go out outside . and this be in the night in the snow . and I be practically naked . the minute I go out , I see the german patrol come close . I be 11 year old by then .", "so what do 11-year-old do in such case ? I know if I run back in , they will shoot I and who know how many people with I . so I lie down naked in the snow until the german patrol pass . and then when I come in , into -- in the room , whatever you want to call it , I be shake . I be practically dead from fear and from cold .", "INT : how far be it from Bershad to Balta ? fr : it be about two day that we be take by horse and carriage -- sleigh actually , it be winter -- about two day . we be practical naked and after almost three year already . so we be take to Balta . and when I arrive to Balta , nobody be there to pick we up .", "it for the -- for the holiday , for Christmas , New Year , we have to go to the orphanage . so it be 12 kilometer , again to march . I be practically still naked . it be winter , snow , to stay until the orphanage over the New Year 's holiday . so at least they give I a coat .", "because they want the people in town to see that the child from the orphanage be well-dressed . but the child in the orphanage , they be hungry . they be naked . it be a mess . so they take away a coat from another child to give to I that I be also dress like all the child from the orphanage .", "ns : Daily life be , first of all , to work , normally . second , they use to bring in thousand of thousand of woman . naked , only with a blanket on top of they . and they stand in the line to be gas . they do not know they be get into this .", "what happen then ? EB : then they start to select people to the left , people to the right , you know . and they -- people to the left , you know , they take we through a line where we have to undress . and they take all the jewelry or anything valuable we have with we , you know , we have -- they take everything else . we be give some striped kind of clothing .", "so we already know what be go on . everybody be out of the house . with nightgown , with pajamas , naked , and start run from one place to another to rescue , to run out from the ghetto . whoever be kill be kill . I mean , they be shoot .", "you know , like my mother give -- give they to keep for -- for we . so I go into they . I say -- I be naked and barefoot . I have nothing on I . run in the middle of the night .", "then they come in , and they pick from each barrack young people . and they put we into a separate barrack . and they tell we to undress , and we be sit on the bed naked . so they say -- somebody say they -- they be ship we to coal mine , -lsb- INAUDIBLE -rsb- which be near Buna , where they ship a lot of hungarian people where they die . a lot of they die in these coal mine .", "HC : -- then we travel between camp . but I want to mention , be in Auschwitz be a month , be in 1943 , February . the , the head of the block , which be the German who be in the head of the block , Olshevsky , tell we to undress completely , and make we run to the shower , which be about a city block . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- we , we come into the shower and there be cold water . and they let we stay there for about five or six minute , and then they chase we back out .", "there be -- must have be outside , freezing , because when I come back to the block , I have chunk of ice on my body . and in fact , one of the , one of they young man fall right dead there , on the run . then , when we come back to the block , they make we -- he make we sit on the bed , naked , with the window open on all side for about two hour . then they give we the clothes . and thing like this happen on and off in Auschwitz , which I do not recall any of -- every little incident , but there be many incident of beating , and for little -- any little thing .", "and they -- after that , they bring in hungarian Jews , woman , into that camp . and they tortured they so much , you know ? they keep they naked , outside the camp there , on the other side . I also remember a incident about be in Auschwitz . it be in 1943 .", "` ja . ' ? -rsb- on the railway track , there be freeze , naked body -- but skeleton , of course . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- he start -- the head Gestapo start laugh like a horse . ` ha ha , ha ha , ha ha ! '", "when we come in at night , we see they . all those elegant people with they fur coat , all butcher up . we have to unload they from the truck , to undress they , to dig big ditch , and to lay they down . one with the head that way , and the other one with the head this way . how many more they should be get ?", "one with the head that way , and the other one with the head this way . how many more they should be get ? the clothes -- they have to undress they completely , because the clothes could say witness that who you be . but this way , they be pour some kind of chemical over the body , that they should rot . and they should burn sooner , rot faster , you know -- they rot in the ground .", "mg : he take I to the -lsb- german -rsb- there . they be full of prisoner there . and he tell I I should undress , take I to the bathroom -- where the prisoner come to urinate . he take I , he give I a shower , he wash I , that black sergeant . he shave off all my hairy part of my body , from the top to the bottom .", "ef : the lack of decency , nothing , you know ? you say -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . and you be naked , absolutely naked , before they . and then you hair cut off . and they take my tooth out .", "so and then they take we out of -- and I be still without clothes . so we go through the main -lsb- non-english -rsb- with all the man look at we . INT : Naked ? ef : yeah . I have no clothes .", "because I know he be -- have a part in it , like daven before the -lsb- non-english -rsb- . and he be a tall man with a long beard . and I would have like to get a strip of it , a piece of -- INT : do the whole family go when the movie come out , to see it ? hb : oh , yeah .", "and we go to smuggle across the border . and as soon as we get across , we get arrest by the german police , put in a prison camp . and they strip everything that we have and whatever valuable we still have and send we back to Poland and -- and to near -lsb- inaudible -rsb- , there be a small town , Walbrzych . w-a-l-b-r-z-y-c-h . Walbrzych , near Breslau or -lsb- inaudible -rsb- .", "and I always do that on my bike . INT : what be you bike like ? BVA : Hmm , the back wheel be all right , but front wheel have a rubber strip . very hard , so I have several fall with it . because when there be a pebble in front of it and the wheel touch it , it turn over and you fall .", "and we be so naive . we be so young . and there be a whole group of they , and they make we undress -- totally naked . they never harm we . they never touch we .", "they never harm we . they never touch we . but they make we undress . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- and then after a while , they send we back to my parent . and I hear they laugh , of course , and make remark .", "-lsb- laugh -rsb- but this be not -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . but the only thing be they say you need a shower . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- the shower be -- I be cleaner than they be they take away all we clothes , naked . and they check we in case we get something in we mouth or something else , you know , in we body , something valuable . they check .", "Auschwitz be just more than work or torture . Auschwitz be the -- how shall I tell you ? Auschwitz be the place where you be naked -- emotionally naked , spiritually naked , and of course physically naked . you come to that place . you know that you will not get out of it .", "the next time I see he it must there be a few hour later . we be throw into a room which be -- which be , fortunately , a shower . no towel , no soap , naked , with we body hair shear , and push to run and run forwards through a space that be on both side have a barb wire . and on one side of the barb wire man be stand . and he be among they .", "and he be among they . and all the sophistication , and all the austrian culture all disappear from he face . it be the face of a lecherous man , lick he finger -- lick he lip , look at the parade of young , naked , female body . INT : oh my dear . HA : and I stop just for a fraction of a second .", "and if not , so what be the difference where I survive ? a few week later come a letter from my mother . and she write , angel of life must have push you because all those people who stay in the orphanage be strip naked and barefoot and put in a bus . and for many year I do not know what happen to that bus . you remember the film -lsb- inaudible -rsb- ?", "INT : but , but the , the sort of -- ls : concentration camp . we have to parade naked in front of the ss man . we , we have ss man , you know , -lsb- non-english -rsb- to watch we . INT : guard .", "and , and , I hear he say , you know , you have to see the , the , the cabaret , -lsb- ? Eve ? -rsb- Cabaret with beautiful naked woman dancing , and this here . and he take a group and go down Pigalle , Rue Pigalle . and I be intrigue .", "it be really bitterly cold . and it be rain . and we have to undress completely in one barrack and run out -- leave we clothes where they be , with shoe and everything , run out completely naked to another barrack , where there be shower and -- and where they spray we with -- brush we with some chemical liquid , delouse we . and we have a shower . we be take out of that -- -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- after the shower , out in the cold again , out in the rain , naked .", "and we have to undress completely in one barrack and run out -- leave we clothes where they be , with shoe and everything , run out completely naked to another barrack , where there be shower and -- and where they spray we with -- brush we with some chemical liquid , delouse we . and we have a shower . we be take out of that -- -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- after the shower , out in the cold again , out in the rain , naked . we go to another block , another barrack , where we be give a pair of trousers , a striped -- all in striped clothes -- jacket , pajamas , and a shirt , and -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- some wooden shoe . they be -- the -- the sole be -- be not leather , but it be -- the sole be completely wooden , and the top be like canvas .", "INT : you say too you would tell I about the selection . fk : well , yes . we have from time to time -- we have to walk naked in front of doctor . I do not know -- some people say Mengele be there . I do not know .", "I do not know . I do not know . I only know that we be to march in front of -- of ss officer in uniform , and then they look at we naked and say , you go there , or you go there . if people could not walk very well or could not -- have bone be show , and they know that this be the end of they strength . but we be always tell , you must walk up very straight and march , so that you should not be select .", "I still remember the name . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- everybody stay in line to go through . the doctor tell you to undress to the waistline . and I put my -- I be afraid . I be a wounded man .", "then the worst thing be that un-lousing thing . when we have to go through after that , you go into the un-lousing . you strip . now come the finale , as far as my parent be concern . I tell you how -lsb- german -rsb- , how little innocent we be raise .", "I think that kill she . that be the beginning of the end for she , this little -- whatever she have . and of course we all have to strip then of course . everybody do . it be not just we , everyone .", "INT : upon arrival ? fl : upon arrival , everything -- there be nothing left of you own . you be completely strip of everything . INT : do you think a lot about you father ? fl : yes .", "the man be separate from the woman . and we be take to a bath house or whatever they call it . Cold water , the middle of winter , and you be just strip , leave all you belongings . and you never see they again . and you be give , when you come out it shiver .", "and they put we to work . all of they -- all of we be put to work . obviously , when you come in , it be the usual routine , the selection , the feeble and elderly to the left , the one who remain alive to the right , strip again of everything and give other striped uniform . by that time , we do not have any possession . we do not have anything .", "and we do that for quite a few week . and then thing -- a lot of thing happen all of a sudden , after a few week when we be in Plaszow . and also , they have another thing that you have to strip and walk naked in the camp so that they can do these awful selection . every couple of week . it be the most dreadful thing .", "every couple of week . it be the most dreadful thing . you can imagine how you feel when you be ask to strip . and I mean , we be bring up in a jewish home . I would not even strip for my mother in the bathroom .", "you can imagine how you feel when you be ask to strip . and I mean , we be bring up in a jewish home . I would not even strip for my mother in the bathroom . use to lock the door when I go to have my bath or thing like that . and they have to strip naked , whether it be summer or winter , and to walk in the camp or all these german to look .", "I would not even strip for my mother in the bathroom . use to lock the door when I go to have my bath or thing like that . and they have to strip naked , whether it be summer or winter , and to walk in the camp or all these german to look . they be walk around with ride crop and make remark , ugly remark , while we be do it . so it be pretty awful .", "you come out of this railway -- this railway station , and it be just desolation greet you . and the usual selection straightaway . you get to strip and the selection . a lot of people be then send to the left side . my best friend 's mother be in front of I , and she be send to the left side and a lot of other people .", "condition there be terrible . it be all that you see in all the film after the liberation you see in that Birkenau camp . but first we go to the -- to the bath , the usual bath , and strip again and take all you clothes . and every one of we be give a bundle of clothes to put on . they also shave all the woman 's head .", "and they make step . and -lsb- inaudible -rsb- be stay up a ss man with a machine gun and be go . they be naked . 10 people down . and he shoot they all .", "all what we have be either take away or destroy by the Nazis . so can you imagine a family of five person -- three sister , two brother , two parent -- and a additional family of my grandmother and my uncle and my -- my aunt . that nothing -- nothing but nothing remain , and that we be just with we naked body -- naked body -- force to leave . and this be , of course , even better than to be destroy . and about the part of destruction , I will tell you now .", "INT : there be nothing of -- of financial value , of monetary -- jd : we could not -- we do not have -- there be nothing monetary , as far as I remember . we go with we naked body . this be it . INT : do you have a -- do you have a tallis or a yarmulke or any religious --", "and I be so dear to my father , like every daughter be dear to they father . and he look at I . and I stay in bed with my naked head . he give just one look . I do see he white face .", "I could not describe how . it be hard to describe how the ward look in that typhus ward . woman be lay on one side , man on the other side , naked , with all insect , with all fly fly around they hair and just a piece of paper cover the body . and all of they -lsb- inaudible -rsb- to the last breath . when Chanka stand outside , but I go in .", "impossible . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- so another person come -- Dr. Mengele . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- we have to take off everything , and we have to stand in line , all completely naked . he come -- he be a sight , in a perfect uniform , with a -- with a whip and white glove . I will never forget the white glove .", "MH : yeah . but then it be , of course , before that . as soon as they come in and even before , the Hungarians catch a lot of jewish man on the street , and they undress they . that be how they find out whether they be jewish , of course . and a lot of people be drag out of they home and take to the Danube and they -- they just be shoot .", "it be a bachelor . so it be one bedroom , and so-called lunchroom together divide with the kitchen . the kitchen be just a strip . and he be work in different factor -- factory until he reach -- go to -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . and he do night shift as well as day shift many a time , so we hardly meet because I be work in a dress factory , finish .", "one day it be one every fifth . once it be one every tenth . it -- it just -- I -- we have time where we have to stand naked . we use to call it the naked parade . without any reason whatsoever , they would line we up , call we for the -- call roll .", "once it be one every tenth . it -- it just -- I -- we have time where we have to stand naked . we use to call it the naked parade . without any reason whatsoever , they would line we up , call we for the -- call roll . be that how you say it ?", "ss : Roll call . sorry . and naked , just as you be bear . and stand in the snow or run in the snow for hour upon hour . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and once , I remember a young boy , because they count we a few time a day .", "a shower be just drip , drip of cold water -- just every here a -- here and there a drip of water . I would not mind the cold water if it will be water , but a drip here and a drip there be absolutely unbearable . then , of course , they take we -- naked -- to have we hair cut . and there be hungarian woman who work with the Germans there . and be naked , no matter under what circumstance , even in Auschwitz , you do feel embarrassed .", "then , of course , they take we -- naked -- to have we hair cut . and there be hungarian woman who work with the Germans there . and be naked , no matter under what circumstance , even in Auschwitz , you do feel embarrassed . and I say , I have get clean hair , why do you cut my hair ? I do not have lice .", "and it be a very , very cold winter then . INT : you remember that particularly ? wr : yes , because we have to somehow undress and dress in the same room around the fire . and my grandmother be very depressed somehow . she use to cry a lot .", "but my grandfather seem a very brave man . and he be always joking and make -- so pretend it be a game of hide and seek . and so I be guess , because we all have to undress in the dark , in the same room . INT : and you grandmother be depress because of the situation ? wr : well , I do not know .", "and there we be , in front of this famous sauna . but the Germans -- we stay all night there and nobody know what be go on . and the next day , they put we all into the sauna naked . it be Mengele who be do that -- INT : you see he ?", "at the sauna -- sauna building . first it be a hallway . we be naked . and there he be stay . I be behind my mother , because I think that , wherever my mother will be send , I will go with she there without go through the selection .", "they ridicule the jewish people who be there , beat they up . there be also take , we landlord , Milbitzki . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- they strip he naked , put on he head a russian Army hat . and he have to sing russian song in front of all of they . girl be rape .", "and sometimes they be worse than the german guard . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- so in the first night we have beating and kill again . and we get strip naked . they check we for -- for lice . and we be shave , take to the shower .", "-lsb- ? Mikulas ? -rsb- have order that every man have to run half naked to the bathhouse and get wash . it be a frosty night . only the little lamp above each block shed faint light .", "so he come back . and he send I back . we be stand naked outside in the frost . and -- so such -- such event , such -- have happen very often there . there be many more , what I describe in the book .", "so and then again come the selection . and there I witness what the Professor Mintz , what you ask I about the ghetto when he be a professor , famous Professor Mintz . we be undressed , strip naked . and we would go -- there be a table standing there . and there be sit , German -- german guard , german officer .", "but we never come out the same way . we go out the other side . and he have -- but suddenly , my grandfather be stand next to I naked . I have never see he naked in that -- my little life . he have two hernia come out like this .", "we go out the other side . and he have -- but suddenly , my grandfather be stand next to I naked . I have never see he naked in that -- my little life . he have two hernia come out like this . I look at he .", "I come out . we be stand there all . we have to undress naked , and we get dress . and one be talk to the other , the Czechs . I do not talk to the Czechs boy .", "there be a table here . and he be sit on the table . and we have to undress , put we clothes in here . and we have to come out in front of he . and he be usually say to -- when you come in front of he , naked -- he look at you and he say , leave .", "and we have to undress , put we clothes in here . and we have to come out in front of he . and he be usually say to -- when you come in front of he , naked -- he look at you and he say , leave . and he say , right . and we have to go back and dress again .", "this be the other part of it , as you can see . there , this where they come in . and that be probably the undress hall . they undress there . and they have even to hang up they coat .", "there , this where they come in . and that be probably the undress hall . they undress there . and they have even to hang up they coat . I do not see all that .", "but all I see here be that room . and that be the gas chamber . they come in from there naked . and when I ask he , I say , there be still some blood there . he say , yes , because we have to clean it quick .", "what they do , the first day we come , they -- they -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . they take everything away from you . and you go in , uh , put you naked . this be around -- must be around January . it be so cold , and you be naked .", "and you go in , uh , put you naked . this be around -- must be around January . it be so cold , and you be naked . in -- it be not ourselves . it be a group from other camp .", "the old people and the child go to the gas chamber , right ? so my mother probably be with the rabbi and the rebbetzin . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- they have to undress and to go into the gas chamber . and they be gas and burn , right ? INT : guess so .", "MK : yeah . my mother do not have the dignity to die like a person . she have to undress in front of the rabbi . I will never , ever forgive the Germans for this . because I be work in a munitions factory .", "and they do not want to spend one bullet to kill my mother . she should die in dignity . just to undress she in front of man -- and I will never , ever forgive this . INT : you do not know this , though , at the time , do you ? mk : no .", "MK : I be in shock . they shave , shave all the hair . and they leave we stand naked for a whole night . oh , we come and -- oh , this , I have to tell . when we come in , it be night , in the evening .", "mk : well , when I come to Majdanek , we have to go out . and we be take to the -- to take bath to take bath . we have to have the belt put -- not in -- we have to undress with nothing on we and have the belt like this . if it be a belt , a double belt , and they find a double belt with something in it , you get beat up and maybe shoot . so a lot of people throw the belt away because the double belt have money .", "so I and my father say we have to go and , find uh , mother and my brother . and when we have to go to the river . so at night , we have to cross the river , so my father undress , and I undress myself . and he give I all the clothes , and I put it on my head . and we swim , and I go on my father 's , uh , back , and we swim through the river .", "from the Ukraine , they do not transfer . they use to take they out . use to be ditch and everybody have to undress . use to line up five in a row , and through the neck , they use to shoot five people . they be save bullet .", "now we be do it a different way . it be not as sophisticated anymore . ok , so you do not have people that come in , they have undress . they get they hair shear . they go into a gas chamber .", ", of the crematorium down there at one time . there be a date . it be in publication , there you see woman run on a field down there toward the crematorium naked . that be one that be take by -lsb- ? Shmuelevitz ? -rsb-", "and they be all well-fed . that picture be take at the end of 1945 . he say , well , these be concent -- they have strip uniform . they look fantastic . I say , look , there be one thing that I want you to do .", "ml : I find it out through friend of mine . I remember one name , Monek Medlah . they , before they come to in , into the camp on the railroad train , they tell they to undress . and they leave all they clothes and they luggage and everything on the train . now between the train , some people , like two or three friend , I think , they hide underneath the clothes .", "so they take we out . we should bury the dead people which they kill . we do undress they . we have to take out they tooth -- gold tooth . if anybody have a ring , or anything , we have to cut the finger off to take out the ring .", "if anybody have a ring , or anything , we have to cut the finger off to take out the ring . and there be a lot of different kind of work . after we undress the -- the people , the dead body , we have to bring into the excavation and throw they in . it happen once to a friend of mine . he be work together with I .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- whoever be smart , take along with they some bread or something to drink . but most people have nothing with they . when we come to Auschwitz , we undress , and we go into Auschwitz without anything on we -- on we body . INT : how be you process when you arrive at Auschwitz ? ml : we get the number .", "ml : Dr. Pollock . he come in and they take I in to see what happen with my leg . and the -- and the back where I catch the bullet , it just strip I . it tear out a piece of flesh , but that heal up right away . so when he come in and he take I down to the operating room , where they do not have anything to do -- to do or to give you .", "swab ? -rsb- or somebody there on the side and be watch we . and they have the nerve while we be stand in line to wait to get into the , uh , to the , uh , undress room there , whatever . and I ask the guy , the ss man , I say , in German , I say , what be go on ? what be go on up there ?", "what be go to happen here ? so they take we in into a big , big hall . and they tell -- they tell we in -- tell we to undress , to bare undress , completely . and I still remember that . the Germans , to show we what we situation be , they bring in a poor man from the outside with a ss .", "and he give he 25 in front of all of we . that man be scream till he could scream -- INT : we be naked -- mg : -- until he could not scream . INT : I be so sorry .", "mg : -- until he could not scream . INT : I be so sorry . mg : and we be naked . we be naked , and look -- to look -- to watch what he do . and then he walk away like he be God .", "INT : I be so sorry . mg : and we be naked . we be naked , and look -- to look -- to watch what he do . and then he walk away like he be God . he -- he -- he own the world , you know .", "mg : yeah . INT : they put you in that room . and they undress you . mg : yeah . INT : do they shower you first before they --", "then the Russians come closer and closer , come closer . then there be a order that we be not allow to leave the barracks . if we have to go to the bathroom in the middle of the night , only naked . if you be naked , then they would not shoot you . if you have a little clothes , they be think that the partisan come in or something .", "then there be a order that we be not allow to leave the barracks . if we have to go to the bathroom in the middle of the night , only naked . if you be naked , then they would not shoot you . if you have a little clothes , they be think that the partisan come in or something . so they do not want -- you know .", "if you have a little clothes , they be think that the partisan come in or something . so they do not want -- you know . so they tell we to go to the bathroom naked . so this be the sign that we be inmate from the camp , you know . INT : from Plaszow .", "there be one man -- INT : excuse I , Mike . would you tell I how , when you come down the train , do they undress you ? what do they do ? mg : no , they take we in a -lsb- ?", "it be around January or February . it be bitter cold outside . and they take all the people out of the hospital , and they just throw they out on the street , throw they out on the street , bare naked , in a -- in a bitter cold day . INT : you mean on -- in the camp ? mg : in the camp .", "mg : in the camp . on the street in the camp . and they be naked . and I remember I be sit there by the door like this here in the window , and I see a man -- I know the man . he be a very learn man .", "and there be hundred of people like this here on the street in the camp scatter around . and we be not allow to open up the door . and this be how they die -- naked , frozen , and outside . INT : without they be shoot . just --", "and they -- they make we go up , and the nurse say , come , come , come . we go up there -- all people , a lot of people . and they start to undress we . I have -- I have no hair on my head . I have a stripe here like this .", "but then , they take we to the station where the wagon be wait for we to transport we to somewhere else . they have another selection . this time , we have to be naked . you have to strip everything off . and you have to -- one by one , they look you over .", "they have another selection . this time , we have to be naked . you have to strip everything off . and you have to -- one by one , they look you over . so my sister say to I , what do it help you now ?", "but , anyway , then they take we all -- no , I mean , we fill up a cattle car . and before we go into the cattle car , a little canvas , little tepee -- no , hut be fix up . and hungarian soldier insist the woman have to come there and undress . and they will examine if they be not smuggling something out -- and just real , real sadistic , horrible cruelty for no reason at all . INT : be you examine ?", "this I remember . and that help I a lot , that I just know to -- to have go through the humiliation . when the woman start to undress , and the nudity -- I still can not stand nude people , I mean , especially nude woman . I go to a public swimming pool here because the other one be close -- do not matter . and there be a lady in a wheelchair .", "and then it be just a matter of follow instruction . do this , do that . and that be when it be the undress and the shaving . and when the shaving -- I do not know . this polish girl be probably good or bad , I do not know .", "do not think I look horrible , you look horrible . and just -- it be -- oh . I do not ever want to see naked woman . INT : how long be you in Auschwitz ? GB : very short -- three day .", "and the guy who ever want to come in , I have to let they . anyway , the other thing about Stutthof , well , the cruelty be unbelievable . like , we have to stand four or five hour , sometimes all naked early morning because they want to sort out people for the crematory . and that be a real specialty . like one officer would go for blue-eyed girl .", "I do not remember what he do , but I be send with the other woman to a factory . there be all bench and seat . and we sit there , and we have to strip boot and shoe , leather boot and shoe , and put the piece all together . and I believe they be send to Germany later . yes .", "INT : so how do you live here in this camp at the salt mine ? cn : so , I just want to tell you this . when we get -- when it be we turn to come forward to the ss -- the other have already go -- they strip we of everything . and all we get be like a long chemise . no pants , no bra , no nothing .", "Neuberger 's ? -rsb- office . and I show he -- you get a strip of paper , deportation . he say , what ? I do not understand , he say .", "that truck go to the bathhouse for a bath . so you arrive at the bathhouse , which be really the gas chamber . you undress . you hang you clothes up . you be tell to hang you clothes up nicely .", "and the glass come on broken , so you could not eat it . -lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- anyhow , get back to the -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- 50 man walk to another barrack . Strip , all the clothes come off . a new , thick winter coat , specially make in London . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- and all thick clothes .", "-lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- and all thick clothes . we be go to a cold country -- Poland . and we have to strip everywhere , and we sit back -- I sit on a old wooden seat . and one of the prisoner with a pair of clipper take you hair off . well , that be already a funny feeling .", "now they be go to weed out the weak from the strong , from the fit man . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- -lsb- sigh -rsb- we be stand in a barrack . we have to strip . there be two table . on each table , there be a ss with a paper in he hand .", "to the left mean the gas chamber , which I do not know at the time . to the right be work elsewhere . and I be stand there strip . and I be stand . about a dozen man in front of I .", "yeah , it be all in Auschwitz , what I be say , you know ? now then , so one morning , I be queue up for a bandage for this . and there be a man in a white coat look at all the man , all strip naked queue up . and he look at the body , and he look at I , and he take my number . I think nothing about it .", "and the -- I -- and I come to the -- -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- uh , they take I to work . I work at -lsb- non-english -rsb- . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- this be , um -- we have to make from plastic -- it be this long strip that say that need this for airplane . and , uh , this be with tar , you know ? it glue .", "and when they be not so busy , they select we very often . they tell we we should go in the wash room and they state they would select we . and they look -- you have to get naked . and they say , it once be what I get , that they make you right and leave , leave and right . and I run to the not good one .", "on the -- on the -- on this court -- and this courtyard be just -- be cover with snow . we be come out of the shower . and we be stand naked , wet . we do not receive any towel . nor , by the way , do we receive any soap .", "she certainly could not have survive . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- so that be the last I see my parent . I myself be take in a row of five , well , push , rush , hurry , very , very fast , into a very , very cold big hole , where we have to strip naked , where we be shave by german ss man all we hair on we body , and then disinfect with some very stinging red stuff , and then throw one piece of clothing . no underwear , no shoe , just one piece of clothing . and then we be push out .", "because , yes , because the next morning we be , very early we be take out of the barracks . and we have to go to the appellplatz for the main , main place , where , where about 15,000 of we be gather . we all have to strip naked . and we stand there naked for the next 14 hour . it be cold .", "and we have to go to the appellplatz for the main , main place , where , where about 15,000 of we be gather . we all have to strip naked . and we stand there naked for the next 14 hour . it be cold . we be freezing .", "and we , we have to show they we palm . and sometimes they say , open you mouth . and -- but otherwise , that be why we have to stand for 14 hour naked . and they , they do not -- anybody who collapse , of course , be take away . and that be , that be finish .", "and I do not know what happen to other , no idea . but in we group we be 1,000 hungarian woman . we be sit there on a strip somewhere . I do not know where . it be Auschwitz A camp .", "and so we could use the bathroom quite often , but not often enough . and so I feel rather dirty . and therefore , when later on when it be , when it come to winter and we have beautiful snow , I use to slip out of the barrack at night and strip and wash myself in snow because I feel that it be incredibly necessary , absolutely necessary to , to , to , to be clean , to keep oneself clean . and I mean I could have be shoot at the spot that I come out of the barrack , which I be not suppose to come out of at night . but nobody do anything to I .", "then he turn around and he say , do not worry . you mother be go to go to work to a match factory . and when we come to Auschwitz , and I see what be go on , they -- they undress we completely . we have to undress , we have to put all we belong and undress completely naked in front of people . and then they tell we to go in into like a shower room .", "you mother be go to go to work to a match factory . and when we come to Auschwitz , and I see what be go on , they -- they undress we completely . we have to undress , we have to put all we belong and undress completely naked in front of people . and then they tell we to go in into like a shower room . and I say to myself , be I happy that my mother do not have to go through the cruelty that man be walk back and forth and look at we naked body ?", "we have to undress , we have to put all we belong and undress completely naked in front of people . and then they tell we to go in into like a shower room . and I say to myself , be I happy that my mother do not have to go through the cruelty that man be walk back and forth and look at we naked body ? INT : you think she be be spare that ? SM : yes .", "and they take we away . now , you could not see where you be go . you could only see a strip of light on the top of the truck . and I be really not certain where we go , except that I have puzzle on the map . we go into some swamp land .", "and they -- you simply follow -- they show you where to go . eventually , you wind up in -- you leave all you clothes off . you be just like naked , in the nude . you go into this huge place , which be the shower room . and I do remember I -- I be able to take , with I , my forge ID card .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- this be the end of the forge identity . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and eventually , after two minute or so , they run you out , or they run you out of the shower room . and there be another barrack that you have to run through , naked . and some people be throw some clothing article at you , which be totally , I mean , out of place and out of size . and most of these thing have a lot of paint .", "perhaps the Germans would hear . they only want to rob we of everything that we have , the few possession we have . so we have some coat and shoe , and they -- they just -- they strip this practically to we -- to we -- they take away everything they could . if -- if we have anything -- we have any ring , any -- any clothes , and they let we run practically naked . INT : what do they leave you with ?", "they only want to rob we of everything that we have , the few possession we have . so we have some coat and shoe , and they -- they just -- they strip this practically to we -- to we -- they take away everything they could . if -- if we have anything -- we have any ring , any -- any clothes , and they let we run practically naked . INT : what do they leave you with ? what be you wear when they leave ?", "and God know how she ever manage -- a little girl -- to find a way from such a distance . so she be there . and she escape practically naked because during the day , sometimes , we would take off we shirt and put 'em over the smoke of the fire so -- so the lice would -- would -- would fall . you know , they use to -- that be how we keep ourselves as clean as possible . so apparently she be do that , and she just run away with -- with a little underwear .", "s when I come there , of course , I see my aunt . it be a great reunion . and before they take I into the house , they strip I of all my clothes , and they burn it outside , and they have clean clothes for I . they bath I and everything else . and I get so excited that I ask they to put the electric on .", "from time to time , they would come . as a matter of fact , whenever they come , we have to hide we weapon , because we be always afraid that they might take it away say that they be a military group , and they need it for themselves . so as much as we welcome they , we be afraid of they , that they might strip we from -- my uncle be afraid that they might take the weapon away from we . but they be there , and there be military action against the german by the partisan . and as I mention , the war be not - be not go that well for they any longer .", "to give you a better example , about four month later , they have a selection . it be call the -lsb- non-english -rsb- . too many youngster in the camp , so they take 500 youngster between 14 and 19 , we undress . there be a chief doctor , the ss man . and you have to parade in front of he .", "and I remember my mother , I see she last time then , and she be sit and cry . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and they put I on the bed . they take the only clothes I have from I , and I could not get out from this bed to walk naked . I be there day and night . I do not have anything to wear .", "but that be not give to we . in 1939 , there be rumor that there be go -- there be conflict between Poland and Germany . the Germans issue a -- they -- a -- ultimatum to Poland that they should hand over a strip of territory , of they -- they corridor . they also want the -- the city of Danzig . we be sit in front of the radio listen with apprehension .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- so we have to -- we be not allow to be in the street . and now if we have to go in the street , they issue that every jew have to wear a armband with a star of David . so from sheet , we cut out strip , and we be sew and embroider like a little star of David . we be afraid to walk the street . it be full of military , and they occupy .", "they release he . but very shortly , they catch he to another camp . that be to reduce the people of they possession and strip they of whatever they have . by then there be distance camp where they say they be work camp . also , with some money , whoever have money could free they temporary .", "very respectable people . and now we see Mrs. Okser shot . and she dress be up that you see she thigh naked . it be like -- my sister feel it be like indignant in death . so she find a rag and cover she .", "we do not go in right away . my mother get in and take water . and we wash on the outside , strip and wash on the outside , even though it be cold . and then when we get in , she warm the water . we wash , and put out we clothes to freeze , because it be winter .", "I take a train to Buchach . it be a scenically nice little town . there be a river strip , a contribute -- a tributary to the river -- the Vistula , which go to the Baltic Sea . very scenically . Hilly on both side .", "I could not speak because I be freeze . and they think that I do not understand german . so I follow they because Mrs. Winer be strip the bed for the laundry to wash in that last room where the girl be . so I go in . and I say , Mrs. Winer , there be some german here .", "anyone can handle to cut the hair machine . so a few girl volunteer , and they do a terrible job . First of all , we have to strip completely . nothing . nothing be -- except we shoe , be allow to hold on to .", "nothing be -- except we shoe , be allow to hold on to . nothing else . and we be stand there naked . they come with these machine and they -- and then -- and they shave my hair completely . bald , the private part , everything .", "since we , we open up the suitcase , we find medicine , and sometimes a little bit of food , and clothes , sweater . and we try to smuggle in whatever we could to the camp . but be not always possible because be inspection all the time , where they strip we naked by the gate before we enter the camp . and it be very difficult . but occasionally , it happen .", "because it bring back memory . but the rest , we do not see . just we see they body -- they naked body the following few hour later , or the follow day . INT : be you able to have any contact with any of the man in the sonderkommando ? jr : yes .", "and there be 3,000 woman this time . and I see so many . and everybody naked . and one day come in a ss man and hold a blanket , and grab I , and take I out , put a -- a blanket -- the -- the gray blanket , and take I out , and then , take I in a car back to the -- to the block where I be . and one french girl be between , a young girl , maybe 16 , 15 year old .", "ss : no . Zyklon come out , the gas . and there be , on the floor , you know , so much naked body . and the ss man come in , and put the blanket over I , and grab I , and take I back to -- to -- to the block . INT : Block 25 .", "body of -- MRR : no , not people I personally know . there be man and woman , naked , because they be clothes have be take by the living . I have see people with they thigh cut off to eat the food . and that for , you know , I be , let I say , at that time sexually innocent .", "I have see people with they thigh cut off to eat the food . and that for , you know , I be , let I say , at that time sexually innocent . to see naked woman and naked man , more skin than bone , like -- almost like doll with disheveled hair , with the deep-set socket or eye , be horrible . it be terrible . it be really terrible .", "he give I some dollar . because he have that . he do not send I out naked , and -- he give I enough that I could live on . and then I have see a opportunity that I could make some money . so I start buy old clothes and sell it by profit .", "but give all you possession up right now , and that will save you life . so whoever want , give everything up . we should have give it up anyway , because then we go into another room where we have to undress completely -- completely , with the exception of the shoe . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- then we have to go into another room , where you have a lot of prisoner sit on bench and you be shave -- head , armpit , and you private part , completely and totally shave . then you go through another room of people that be sit in bench , and wipe you body where you be shave with some kind of chemical that be burn you body like fire .", "ih : after three day . oh , this be the first selection , of course . they tell we to get out naked . and -- I be never heavy , and definitely not at that time . and I be walk , and I be just think how to make myself look more healthy and heavy .", "it be fall , and it -- it be cold already . good and cold . and they undress we . and -- and -- naked completely . and there be a big pile of sweater .", "good and cold . and they undress we . and -- and -- naked completely . and there be a big pile of sweater . and I want to take a sweater because I have very thin little dress or a blouse and skirt .", "but it be Mengele . and , you know , he look . and we be naked . INT : when do they take away you clothes ? ef : when we have to march through he , somewhere .", "now , they pick I certain time , also to pick -- just cut the hair . so that be really a terrible thing . everything be terrible , but that be especially terrible because there be naked woman with child . and they know -- you know they go to the death . and you have to cut -- and you can not say a word .", "it be stand room only . I have a knife with I -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- and go with my father and with the other people in the train . and on the second or third day -- I do not know what , must have be on the second day -- everybody be naked . it be so hot . we do not have food .", "and I think this be the time when people really realize all these rumor , or the so-called rumor that we hear , be right in front of we . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- we be make -- we -- we be put in empty barracks , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- and be a muddy floor , and wall and roof . we be make to undress and be tell that we would put we clothing in orderly fashion , tie we boot and shoe , and so we can find they easily when we come out . and everybody do it . and un -- until today , I do not remember exchange one word with my father or my brother .", "and un -- until today , I do not remember exchange one word with my father or my brother . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- we be make to go into a place where , right away , you could see there be something strange . you see man and woman naked in one -- in one place . woman cut man 's hair . men 's cut woman 's hair .", "when the people come , they go in , in a basement . they put away everything what they have . and they go out naked . and they go to the wood . he see this and he tell we what have happen .", "? -rsb- the -lsb- non-english -rsb- have some people . when they take the clothes , the people go naked to the grave . everybody be naked . the people -- he have some jewish people for they work for they clothes -- be a school over there .", "the -lsb- non-english -rsb- have some people . when they take the clothes , the people go naked to the grave . everybody be naked . the people -- he have some jewish people for they work for they clothes -- be a school over there . they call this the red school .", "land in ? -rsb- Birkenau . and there we be strip of everything . and we be give -- shave , you know , the hair and everything . and then we be issue those uniform , striped uniform .", "I be select for experiment . 15 of we , one morning , be select . we have to undress outside , and we have -- and -- and this doctor , this german doctor examine we body . and with they be -- they take we out because we have no blemished body . they want -- they want people with smooth skin and no blemish on the skin .", "and they be yell to hurry up to close the door . and he could not close the door because it be so full , and I be like stick in the door . so instead of -- and I be naked . I have no clothes . so that be when they take we clothes away .", "and he -- and I take the -- I mean , I run . I run up the ramp . and I be naked . I do not know where to go , what to do . it be nothing inside except barb wire and snow .", "and I manage always to sneak in the ghetto and sneak out and come and go . INT : you would leave the ghetto ? js : very often -- I use to leave in the -- instead , I see child lie dead on the street , grow people lie dead on the street , naked because somebody take they clothes off already and the horse-drawn wagon that pass by and pick up the body and pile they on a wagon , horse-drawn wagon . two man would pick they up like you pick up garbage over here and then bury they in a common grave outside a ghetto in a cemetery , over -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . and I start sneak out the ghetto .", "as we be go to a field -- we be near Chicago . we use to go joy ride all four -- five of we , include the dog . and so I see -- over a little bridge we be come over there be a boy -- young boy and girl naked , have sex , evidently . so my german shepherd dog look down at they . and I say -- and my child be sit in the car .", "they would be accompany by one german with a machine gun . and as they round they up , they make they dig a common grave , and take they clothes off first , so they clothes would not get bloody . now I understand why they undress they . and the clothes would be a reward to the Poles who happen to round up these Jews who jump off those first cattle car head to the direction of Treblinka and Majdanek from the direction of Warsaw . INT : you be a eyewitness to this ?", "a big picture window face the platform of the rail station , otwock . I wake up to the tune of a whistle and machine gun firing . as I look out the window , I see on the platform there be spotlight shine to a bunch of man , and woman , child naked . and as soon as the whistle blow , the machine gun gun they down and the people would fall on top of each other . in back of I in the station , polish black marketeer look out the window like watch a tv movie .", "and she come out of the wood , shoot I , too , if you be shoot they . they do away with all of they . and at first the woman who be flirt with the Germans wait to -- for they to undress themselves , so they would get they clothes as a reward . another incident happen on this little railroad station in Garwolin . I -- I be sit eat a bowl of soup .", "now it be learn that when somebody shoot at you , run zigzag . do not run straight . and then I be completely naked . I keep come back at night , try to board a train . and every night , there be black marketeer scatter throughout the field .", "you could see the edge and everything . they be striped . a a , cap , striped -- everything strip . could not recognize each other . we go into a barrack .", "they open up one door , the back door . there be a guy already -- where , where the guy die -- or beat to death , whatever . they undress he naked . and they put with magic marker the number on he stomach . and he be lay in the back .", "ac : the rest of my life . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- I have see too much . I have see a wagon full of naked people . they use to call they name , who they be . tell my son they be bring I -- I be go to the gas chamber .", "they check I out . I do not know what be all about . they undress I , take a sample of my hair from this part , because here there be not enough hair to for it , from here . they ask I if I -- if anybody do any experiment on I -- they measure my chest , the color of my eye , and I do not know what be all about . as we leave the place , a kapo -- a kapo come over to I .", "what happen -- the first two day I be so knock down , and so depressed , that I do not even go out of the house . I be stay in bed for two day , dress . I do not undress . and finally , after two day , I go out . and pretty soon , we know already that really , there be a tragedy , what happen .", "INT : you be without any clothes ? MH : without any clothes . completely naked . and , finally , -lsb- INAUDIBLE -rsb- when a group come together already , when there be enough people , they put we -- they take we to a barrack . INT : do they give you any clothes there ?", "and I could not believe it that that be what I have to do . and then I see everybody do it , so I know that that be what I have to do . and then we , we stay there all night , naked . and it be -- I remember -- as I remember , now , see one light bulb , one light bulb , and it be dark when the light bulb go out . and we -- as , as , as it become dark , people start to yell and scream .", "they push they out . and they tell they to take off all they clothes and leave the clothes . and they go naked . and then we see -- about maybe 10 minute away from the forest -- we see big grave , gigantic grave . there be four grave .", "they go left . and the people that go to the right , they select to do some slave -- excuse I -- slave labor . INT : do you have to undress and be examine ? sz : we have to go and to take off we clothes . and they put we in , in a , a , a shower , a big place be you we take all we clothes off and put we in the shower .", "INT : they give you a new number ? sz : a new number . and we have to bury the -- the people be naked . they be lay , woman , man . there be no child .", "and he tell we to take shovel , dig grave , and put the skeleton , the body . it be -- excuse I for my expression -- it be stink terrible , the odor from the body , because it be lay for maybe week or a month or so . and it be thousand -- woman , man , all naked . and we have to bury they . and then we see there be german on top of the post , old german .", "and in some way , ironically , even though this be a form of dehumanization , it help we because nobody know that my mother , my sister , and I be relate to each other because they would have definitely separate we . so we use to dig the potato and sit very close to each other . then we also carry grass , you know , strip of grass , from one place the other . in addition to that , there be a huge crater in Majdanek . this be outside of the camp .", "and not that we have a calendar there , but we have a approximate idea as to what the calendar month be . -lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- I remember at one point see a cart with what I think be firewood for the one small oven that we have in we barrack . and actually , what I see be haul away be naked body , one stack on top of the other . and it be sight like this , the constant death and filth and horror that we live with . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- every day , without fail , we be ask to stand on appell .", "we have hear of extermination camp . we have hear of Auschwitz , and we know of the gas chamber there . and we be tell that we be just to go to the shower and there , under the watchful eye of the Germans , we be tell to undress , and we be send into the shower . and of course , we never know when those faucet be turn on whether it would be gas that would come out or water . so there , again , the Germans do everything in they power to ridiculous we , to torment we , and it be just another way .", "my mother work in a kitchen , and my father work in a shoe factory , where she -- where he pull shoe apart and boot apart . and my mother be able to smuggle -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- some potato and a little can to we bunk one day . and -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- with the little strip of -- from we slat , she be able to make a little fire , and somehow she be able to collect a little water . and she be able to get salt , and she be able to -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- make a little soup for we . this be do in very private on we bed , on we bunk , and I be on the bunk with she hide the set-up .", "I be very eager to learn something . so in Lucerne , they send I to a place to learn how to do ceramic to start with . so I learn how to do vase -- ceramic with strip of earth , and work they and turn they . and it be quite nice . but it be very cold in the winter .", "we work in a Weberei , where we be make supplies for soldier . INT : what kind of supplies ? rf : that be -- we make long strip of some kind of rubber . they say it be for tank . and we have to deliver that much every day .", "we do not have even name . we have only number . so what here -- what we be face each other be naked humanity . you be what you be . be -- be a piece of -- of human .", "both side . this be the great lesson of Dachau . and also the lesson of the place of what -- in the -- in this naked humanity -- what the art mean . but , darling , I can not talk for much longer . two hour .", "we walk into a warehouse -- empty warehouse with the stone floor , and there be a big , long table set up . and there be about a dozen ss , Gestapo , in uniform -- the black uniform , the green uniform , the swastika . and we be tell to get undressed , naked . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- about -- oh , I do not know , four foot from the table where they sit , they draw a circle with chalk on the -- on the floor , and they call we , I think , alphabetically . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- can I get up ?", "PY : ok . and they make we stand , face they , look at they , turn around . this be all naked with not a stitch of clothes on you , turn around . and they say -- they send we aside . that -- that be suppose to be a physical .", "it be winter , cold . and the people who have be condemn to gas chamber have only really nothing on . or they have be naked or in they white shirt , you know , look like phantom . they have be load on the truck and the truck turn from the camp , from the hospital camp afterwards -- it be a hospital camp -- to the left , to the crematorium four and five that be there . and there be one jew , I remember .", "and I take the shoe off . he take the shoe , put he hand inside if I get nothing in -- no , then jacket and everything . I be naked . and then my , I dress myself again . and slowly , I put the gold coin back in my hand and walk out in the camp and finish .", "KW : in Birkenau . in Birkenau , from the roof of one of the barracks next to the crematorium number four . and they get they people , naked woman , before the entrance to the gas chamber . it be publicize all around the world after war . this be one .", "they give you , you know -- they hit you , to kind of bring you back to yourself . so , you know , you could not block out if you want to . INT : and the area where you have to undress , be that a closed area ? be it a room ? as : yes , it be a huge white room .", "I could just twist it . you know , I be probably this narrow by that time . and I lean over the water , naked , try to wash myself . and one of the Germans come from another room and find I the kitchen , open the door , and give I a kick in my behind , and throw I out into the cold , with , you know , just naked . you know , let I pull down my clothes and grab the clothes from the floor , you know , and run out .", "you know , I be probably this narrow by that time . and I lean over the water , naked , try to wash myself . and one of the Germans come from another room and find I the kitchen , open the door , and give I a kick in my behind , and throw I out into the cold , with , you know , just naked . you know , let I pull down my clothes and grab the clothes from the floor , you know , and run out . but the farmer , basically , I think they would have like to help we , I really do .", "and the smoke come out day and night , day and night . and when I refer to what people say , we can take we personal belongings , we can take some cutlery . we be order to undress , to strip . INT : by whom ? bs : by the Nazis in charge of Auschwitz .", "field . we be thousand of woman . and after we be strip , I do not know if you have hear the name Josef Mengele . he be call the angel of death . INT : how do you spell he name ?", "we try to cover we nakedness , you understand . but he order we to stand straight . INT : now , when you say that he order you to be naked , be that in one big room where -- bs : no , it be outdoor field . in the outdoor field , where everybody that pass by could see you .", "in the outdoor field , where everybody that pass by could see you . prisoner -- INT : how many of you woman be naked standing in a field ? bs : I do not know . thousand .", "otherwise , we have a few -- we use to call it -lsb- non-english -rsb- . I do not know what be the equal here . -lsb- laugh -rsb- they be like strip of land that we own . in fact , the -- it make beautiful scenery to have a painting of that . the -- each area -- by the way , there be rich people .", "they own the land around the house . and the land be all together in the same area . the poorer people have a strip of land to one corner of the town and a strip of land in another . otherwise , if you have money , a few zloty , you buy a strip of land , and that be how . and also , each area be know of grow a certain -- let 's say , one area be -- they grow potato there .", "and the land be all together in the same area . the poorer people have a strip of land to one corner of the town and a strip of land in another . otherwise , if you have money , a few zloty , you buy a strip of land , and that be how . and also , each area be know of grow a certain -- let 's say , one area be -- they grow potato there . the potato be grow there .", "and also , each area be know of grow a certain -- let 's say , one area be -- they grow potato there . the potato be grow there . another corner of the -- of the town , a strip of land , the wheat be grow better . do you understand ? INT : so you father have this also , that he have to go from one end to the other ?", "and it be beautiful scenery . I remember walk sometimes and admiring . my artist be -lsb- laugh -rsb- wake up at the time to see those beautiful strip of land in different color . you know , it be very nice . INT : give I a impression of a holiday in you house .", "so we probably do not make good time in get to Gross-Rosen . the distance could not have be that great , but it take we many , many day . in Gross-Rosen , we be stand on the Appellplatz , strip totally , no clothes , be order to run towards the shower , toward the delousing facility . we enter the shower . we -- we need to be clean for whatever would happen .", "and there we be in Gross-Rosen itself . once we come out of the shower , we face a battery of -- of guard who be give we a crew cut . after the crew cut , they -- the guard attempt to shave we -- shave a 2-inch strip from front to back on the head . and evidently , this be design so to keep we from be able to flee from the concentration camp . as the guard be shave that 2-inch inch strip from front to back , they would spit on we head to make that shave process possible .", "after the crew cut , they -- the guard attempt to shave we -- shave a 2-inch strip from front to back on the head . and evidently , this be design so to keep we from be able to flee from the concentration camp . as the guard be shave that 2-inch inch strip from front to back , they would spit on we head to make that shave process possible . sometimes before , while we be still at Oskar Schindler 's factory , we do receive a tattoo . the tattoo be not a number , but it be a big kl .", "he must have be -- after he lose a great amount of weight , the uniform hung on he . it do not fit he anymore . he be strip of he rank . there be no longer any spic and span in he . and as we know now , there be a good chance that Amon Goeth come out of jail , arrive to Schindler if Schindler could help he out for the rest of the war .", "there be a railroad , and they bomb the railroad . and we have to move out from we house because all the pane be go from the window . and we be , like , naked . so we move to another family to the wood . they live in far -- far -- much farther away .", "it be call Stutthof . that be where they bring we in . what we have to do be get undressed , leave all we clothes right next to we , completely naked , go into a , a place where it be a shower . we be throw over we water . go out to another side .", "they come and they -- they cut we hair . whole hair , and they shave we all over . we be naked . and the ss and Mengele -- then be Mengele -- come in . and other Gestapo man with they boot , and walk and look .", "skip ? -rsb- and say , you dirty jew . you the -- and we be naked . and they look at we and spit on we . they spit .", "INT : ok . FW : and -- -lsb- laugh -rsb- -- we could not do nothing . we just have to go naked in front of the ss people . and they spit on everybody . and they laugh .", "they think I be dead . the dog run away . I get up , naked , rip here , here , there . almost naked , I walk . I do not go to the first little house , which be closer .", "the dog run away . I get up , naked , rip here , here , there . almost naked , I walk . I do not go to the first little house , which be closer . I do not go to the second .", "INT : delousing . mk : yes . and then , you know , we strip everything . and they give we clothing . and -- pardon ?", "and they draft all the boy and all the jewish boy . and they take they out to ukrainian border , because they draft they as hungarian soldier . and later on , they strip they from they uniform , and they be just slave labor camp . they be mainly work for -- you know , dig ditch or trench and -- and railroad track . and they be kill they right and left .", "I think it start about ' 41 , I be pretty sure . and that be when thing start . then all of a sudden , one day my father get a letter that he do not own he home , which he inherit from he father -- my grandfather -- the butcher shop , and they strip he from legally own a business . so he actually have to pay , to the town , rent on he own property . but because there be no other butcher -- just one and only in the small town , who slaughter only pork , which my father never have , they have to have somebody run the show .", "this be my clothing , and that be my sister , my brother . and all the Jews be in a synagogue . in a synagogue , they take the man , strip they to naked . that be already with the hungarian police and a german solider directing and be there . and at one point , I think my sister be a little bit further away from I , and they get to I .", "that be already with the hungarian police and a german solider directing and be there . and at one point , I think my sister be a little bit further away from I , and they get to I . my mother be strip and stand there so weak and so sickly . and I be a young girl , and I be sick . and I do not want to take my panties off .", "and I tell he , I be sick . and my mother hear my voice , and I be already cry and I be blush , and I use to be very , very shy and easily blush . she somehow hear my voice , turn around as naked as she be stand there , and grab I and holler . ca not you see she be a innocent child ? she be embarrassed to take it off .", "and he put he hand right between my leg , right between my leg to see if I hide jewelry or anything there . I think that minute I want the floor to open up , and I think I will just disappear . as a 15-year-old girl , naked , see my mother naked . and they just -- you know , I do not know if they ever find on anybody anything , but this be what they do . they be very rough .", "so it be a very , very bad experience . and from then on , my mother just cling to I , hold my hand , because I be a child and feel I can not even take care of myself . and my sister -- I think at that point , my mother do not notice , but she be halfway dress up , and they let you put -- after a while , they check you , strip you , touch you , then they let you put back the clothing . so we put back the clothing , and that be how we go . the next day be Sunday , the church bell go .", "I have no idea . it be huge , clean room . and start strip you off . and there I be , sick again . and my poor sister be so -- and I , embarrass .", "and there I be , sick again . and my poor sister be so -- and I , embarrass . and right away , they strip we . put we -- no , first they strip , and naked , they make you sit while they shave you hair . we get off the chair .", "and my poor sister be so -- and I , embarrass . and right away , they strip we . put we -- no , first they strip , and naked , they make you sit while they shave you hair . we get off the chair . I , I , I recognize my sister from the bust .", "and we be line up . and then we main concern -- to stick together . so when one sit on a chair , I think my sister stand there till I get off that chair , all shaven , naked , standing . and then you go into a shower . so I be come out of the shower .", "I mean , in the shower , we start laugh because we look so hideous , all of we , that , that I -- it be unspeakable . you could not -- you could not even imagine . and hundred and hundred of woman , small , short , young , old , all naked , and all shaven -- nobody know nothing . but we sort of cling together . and we watch .", "you be already ready that you be not go to come back to that barrack . but we be fortunate . we be really like , once a month , I think , or once in three week , we strip and we shower , and we put back the same filthy clothes . so anyway , one day i wander . and I be go towards the kitchen .", "but the English insist to empty it . and they put we in there . so I have to go after they sanitize we , and spray we and strip we off , and give we clothes . then we go into the building where regular bed , everything nice , bunk bed , everything clean , and where the person who be walk and strong enough to move around go there . and of course , they feed we the best they could .", "I come into one prison . we go into the yard . and we have to strip we clothes off completely . there be all soldier . but they see that every day , in any case .", "INT : I want to ask you a question , which be quite personal , but I have ask this question of woman . I never ask this of a man . how do that feel to be naked there among many man as a young boy ? ll : it be like -- it be like be among cattle . and it be like , you know , everybody be taller than I be , and it be -- I be just bounce around from -- from one place to another .", "ll : we -- they leave we out there in the dark , in the cold . and -- and the fall of -- of the year in that area get pretty cold . for most of the night we be just stand there naked . and the -- the scene that must have -- if you could -- you can see that , it look like this -- this -- these -- this constant motion of naked body move . we be in this group , but I know that it be pretty cold to be outside , especially outside of the group .", "and -- and the fall of -- of the year in that area get pretty cold . for most of the night we be just stand there naked . and the -- the scene that must have -- if you could -- you can see that , it look like this -- this -- these -- this constant motion of naked body move . we be in this group , but I know that it be pretty cold to be outside , especially outside of the group . so I would work my way in to the middle , where it be a little warmer , where the body be .", "right away , they take we -- only woman . we be never together with man . they take we into these huge room , tell we to undress . and we take a shower . they shave we head .", "they smuggle she out from wherever she be . and they bring -- she bring -- ok . now , the next morning , they , uh -- we go through the same thing , but undress , completely undress . and I remember they be so particular that if you have the slightest little scratch , you know , they would , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- they would not let you go . they be like -- you have to be 1,000 % healthy and -- and clean-looking and whatever .", "I see these -- these concrete column connect with barb wire fence . on the top of each column there be a light . and inside where I be stand , you know , by the platform , I see woman inside who be -- who be -- they hair be -- be strip , and they be in rag . and they come , you know , they have see we , to beg for food . and I think , at my first thought , that this must be the -- maybe a mental asylum or something .", "I be fortunate , because on the other side of the bath house , it be write bath house , but that be the gas chamber . but in my side , it be the bathroom . now , my nightmare , the horrible nightmare -- and I can never forget that , you know -- I be stand stark naked . we have to take all we clothing off , and go into -- into the -- before we go to the bathroom , to the shave room , where they shave you hair from you head . and I enter the shave room , and I be hide myself .", "we have to take all we clothing off , and go into -- into the -- before we go to the bathroom , to the shave room , where they shave you hair from you head . and I enter the shave room , and I be hide myself . you know , I be not even naked in front of anybody . and I go into this room and there be the ss woman , who be with a ss guard who be court she in that room . and she see I come in , she have a really fun .", "and I will never forget -- please leave I a little hair . please leave I a little hair . and she shave all , and then she pull it , you know , so part of it that strip be leave . and the other -- I mean , it -- it be a terrible experience . and then I be so shocked , you know , I just feel a little kind of a little dull sound , as my whole crown of hair , you know , fall on the ground .", "now , why do they paint we ? because they do not want we to escape . so we get a strip of red paint from the base of the neck all the way down , so that you can be see from far if you try something . try to escape Auschwitz -- if you want to commit suicide , try to escape Auschwitz . you know what you fate would be ?", "so we have a kind of a -- you know , like the soldier have a metal thing and you can drink you soup from there . and -- and we have to use that for other purpose . and then we hear -- there be a very bad ss woman , who be with we -- very -- one of the -- some of the worst , who would strip you in the middle of the winter , from -- if you have a rag around you , because you work faster if you be cold . and we hear that she try to put that hut on fire . but she do not manage to .", "and when morning come , you know , the ground of Bergen-Belsen be litter with corpse , of all stage of decay . and I be see where we sleep , next to the corpse . in front of I there be some pyramid of dead , where -- where the body be strip of clothing . we call the pyramid of Dead . and they be hoist up , you know , in a shape of a pyramid -- and that horrible corpse , of all stage of decay .", "they say , Mengele 's come . and Mengele come in , after two week there . we have to all undress -- stand in a line . we be about 350 . and then he start point .", "JP : hit I , because I steal a piece of bread . but I still work as a barber . but then they put I in the sauna , where I have to put on the shower , with the woman naked . and I remember one woman , she survive . she live in Amsterdam .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and I speak with they . they have to come -- they do not come to the -lsb- german -rsb- , the -lsb- german -rsb- . they have to undress . and I speak with they . and he say -- what do -- I do not know nothing about Bergen-Belsen .", "-lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- but when we leave , when they say , this be enough . they have to go someplace else , they liquidate Bialobrezegi completely . so they strip we . we should -- so I figure if I take off my bra , he be go to see that it be stiff . so I just pick it up , and I say , be it ok , in German .", "we be so close . and so we go to Auschwitz . we have to strip completely . they cut we hair . some be cut completely .", "somebody have a piece of beet . so we rub we cheek . we should look good naked . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- so they point with the finger . one go in this side .", "those dirty Jews , my God . look at that . all naked people . they be interested in all these naked people . well , these naked people be Michelangelo .", "look at that . all naked people . they be interested in all these naked people . well , these naked people be Michelangelo . so -- do I have to spell Michelangelo ?", "all naked people . they be interested in all these naked people . well , these naked people be Michelangelo . so -- do I have to spell Michelangelo ? -lsb- laugh -rsb- but , I mean , this be -- they be stupid at the same time as they be mean .", "INT : they be sculpture of -- GK : of Michelangelo . and they be naked , naturally . so , anyhow , it be a tear up place . but I have to go the next day into my examination , and I never forget .", "the victim -- I remember the photograph . they be place in long , narrow tank of ice water , and I can still see they . for up to three hour , at which point , death occur , or by keep they outdoors naked from 9 to 14 hour in sub-freezing temperature . and the testimony that they scream in pain as part of they body freeze . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and then the rewarming of those who do not die be most effective by very hot bath .", "and the testimony that they scream in pain as part of they body freeze . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and then the rewarming of those who do not die be most effective by very hot bath . and then Heinrich Himmler , who be the chief of the Gestapo , a major nazi leader who commit suicide after he be capture by the British , order rewarming by naked woman . and I guess this be , maybe , one of the first truly shocking bit of testimony that I certainly hear . and at one point , four gypsy prostitute , themselves prisoner , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- be produce from Ravensbruck concentration camp to Dachau .", "and I guess this be , maybe , one of the first truly shocking bit of testimony that I certainly hear . and at one point , four gypsy prostitute , themselves prisoner , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- be produce from Ravensbruck concentration camp to Dachau . and the chilled-to-unconsciousness male -- male , naked victim be place between the two naked woman , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- just indicate how obscene all of this be . and I have , in my file in the other room , which I have not pull for this purpose , a copy of that exhibit that be also offer and admit into evidence . captured german document .", "lh : that be sink . and do you know what ? the , the Japs come through from the north , K -- Kota Bharu , and how they get there through the jungle be just nak -- nearly naked . and german officer be there too . they come through too , and Singapore fall .", "and she meet -- she see another girl , who be also shoot through the arm . so both of they start run . and all of a sudden , they notice that they be naked . so they go back , and they take some clothes from the pile of the clothes that be lie near the grave . and they run .", "we have to go there for a bath . so we go inside . we be tell to undress and put we clothing in a bundle in front of we . so everybody be naked with a bundle . then the prisoner -- because the Germans do not come in .", "so we go inside . we be tell to undress and put we clothing in a bundle in front of we . so everybody be naked with a bundle . then the prisoner -- because the Germans do not come in . it be the prisoner , the Auschwitz prisoner who come in .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- now they be call out people to follow , one after the other . they say to go for a bath . there be so many people that it be suffocate , because when people be naked , one on top of the other , be when you watch animal run to get water , and there be a stampede . and people get kill in a stampede . that be exactly what happen .", "I want to be in the front . I do not want it to be behind . I run in the front , but I could not because , you see , you have to squeeze yourself through to get -- it be like go in zigzag through naked body to be in front . and there , we come into a proper bath house where they have shower , also supervise by prisoner . INT : what nationality be these prisoner ?", "and we have already have we bath . then we have to go through a disinfectant , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- a disinfect block , where they put a painting brush in the bucket of disinfectant , and the whole body be paint with this disinfect liquid . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and still march around naked into a block where you be give clothing , the striped clothing of the prisoner . they just look at you . they do not say , what size be you , anything like this .", "he take away we property . he plunder we home . he strip we of everything , include we dignity . and he murder we . so the miracle of Germany after the war be not only the Marshall Plan , what the american pump in .", "and they reaction to this be , so what , you know ? so anyway , I tell they , well , you a put on what you could wear . and I remember that they undress in front of I and start to put clothes on , because the agreement be they could -- they could go away with whatever they be wear . well , in due course , I finally get they to move on . go on and through the place , and I come to a wine cellar that have be bomb the previous day , presumably .", "and then she do not want to talk too much about it . she just say it be a terrible thing . she could remember be force to walk through the camp -- she be about 16 at the time -- walk through the camp naked , in front of everybody . and that really destroy -- girl of 16 , they be very modest and -- and shy in the first place . so you can imagine the impression that have on she .", "SM : I do not see Reina right away . we go through the whole procedure of checking in , as they call it -- which be pretty awful , and dumb , at the same time . I think the worst be that , it not only take forever -- for no reason whatsoever -- but you have , then , also -- some of the stuff be that you have to undress completely . and the one who check you for more than a hidden ring -- but for diamond -- in like little cubicle , when you go to doctor . men and woman be not separate , which do not matter anyway .", "what be they go to do with the baby ? or with that elderly couple ? be they go make she undress -- a lady , truly a lady ? and have she stand there , look whether she have some hidden diamond ? awful .", "now there be that little bit of a window . like a monkey in a zoo , look out . and it be in one minute , so hot , that even the most prudish -- they have to undress . you can not help it . we have to undress .", "and it be in one minute , so hot , that even the most prudish -- they have to undress . you can not help it . we have to undress . of course , no facility at all . there be a bucket .", "and the one who still manage to walk straight do not get kick . psychologically , you know right there and then , you have get ta look at they at all time . you be naked , walk by they naked . walk straight , walk tall , look at they . the moment you be like this , you be in for it .", "it be not even the beginning . there you see colony , hundred and hundred , walk down the camp street . not only naked , but the muselmann , they get to call -- the living death . they cling to each other , they drag each other , they hold on to each other . they all walk slowly to the shower .", "we have already do everything . we have -- we have nothing . that be when they line we up , naked . and you hear somebody say , something 's happen there . I do not know what it be .", "can you imagine ? there be not more than a few hundred in there . and that be when I see also -- -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- while all this be go on , and the ss guard be throw those little bowl after they , I see one young greek woman , naked , sit against one of those barracks , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- giggle to herself , and look around sheepishly , drink she own milk . a young mother . she have kill she baby herself , she newborn baby , before they could kill it .", "and then there be one with a doctor next to you who will first examine you to make sure that you do not drop dead . how much can you take ? then they put you on a table down , face down , naked . there be a doctor . there be one with a whip .", "and we will have a love scene , and I will think , what do you do during the war ? who be you ? I keep undress people for year afterwards . I take off they clothes , and I put they in the camp . and who be you there ?", "it be crummy -- in a window , go around , around -- no air condition in that store -- awful . then I work in cheap joint across weekend in -- in -- in -- in New Jersey . and then I work in a strip joint in New York City . I do not strip . I be the class act there .", "then I work in cheap joint across weekend in -- in -- in -- in New Jersey . and then I work in a strip joint in New York City . I do not strip . I be the class act there . I sing french chanson .", "I sing french chanson . they want one class act . everybody else strip -- right off Broadway . and then I see a ad in the paper , which say they be look for director for hometown talent show all over the United States -- put on show -- local show . let we say for the school , they need a new roof , or send some child to orphanage , whatever .", "so you know , when you come to this place , everything -- we come with good boot . and these guy that be there , they be look for these thing . so we come out of the shower naked , and we be take into a barrack . we be put into these -- into these bunk , triple bunk . and there be just wooden plank there .", "we be put into these -- into these bunk , triple bunk . and there be just wooden plank there . there be five of we on a bunk , naked . and morning arrive very -- just a little while after . and we hear a gong , you know ?", "and body be -- you know , leg be hang out . and you know -- and I could never understand , you know , how could people have such thin leg , you know , just skin and bone , you know ? these be naked body , you know , in this cart , you know ? this be a horrible thing . so you know , we realize where we be .", "they wake you up in the middle of the night . they start at a certain time . and you have to run naked through the camp , to this -- to the -lsb- german -rsb- , to the laundry place . I think it be a big shed . and these ss officer be stand there .", "and , in fact , I be there for four day . and for three day , they do not know what to do with we . we be sit in these barrack room , naked , you know ? like , one have to sit down first and the other one sit in you -- close to you body . you have to spread you leg .", "and that be how I get back to we home or we place where we live . the winter be very , very cold . a lot of people be naked , freezing to death . INT : how do they get naked ? LH : they simply barter away everything they have , and they have nothing leave for themselves .", "the winter be very , very cold . a lot of people be naked , freezing to death . INT : how do they get naked ? LH : they simply barter away everything they have , and they have nothing leave for themselves . most of the people be , include myself and we family , make clothes out of old sack , potato sack .", "and they bring we through Zagreb . and they talk we -- tell we to take all the clothes . and naked , we have to go , uh , through the road there , uh , to the place where they , uh , disinfect we . we be full with , uh -- with , uh -- no -- louse . that be -- that -- that be we entertainment in camp .", "that be we first time that we be send to a big vat with a green liquid that be absolutely vile . but just to get rid of the vermin , the lice and everything . and then they give we strip uniform . that be the first time , again , that they give we those striped uniform with the -- with shoe that be -- they be , you know , canvas top and wooden clog . that be what they be .", "but all we luggage , the food that my mother have save up -- all go . and then there be again a processing kind of a experience , which I do not remember -- I do remember one thing of it . -lsb- cough -rsb- we be tell to strip , and we have to enter a very humid kind of a room and sit on bunk , like a wooden slotted bench . and we be tell this be a de-lousing station . and the mother and the child -- we sit there .", "-lsb- cry -rsb- there , previously , the russian prisoner of war -lsb- cry -rsb- have excavate or dig grave . and also , the man have to dig they own grave , if it be not enough . so these poor people -- I be tell this by eyewitness -- these poor people -- and they picture be in Yad Vashem about as well -- have to undress , naked , have to sort out they clothes -- they underwear , they shoe , the , the top clothes -- all in different pile , have to stand on the edge of the -- of these mass grave and be mow down by machine gun . and they fall into these hole . and they put chalk on it so that they should decompose quicker .", "-- where we be -lsb- german -rsb- , on the yard . we have to -- the yard be surround by ss . so we have to undress as we come in . men and woman have to undress completely naked with we little bundle in front of we , and we have to walk in front of these ss people . they have a trestle table .", "we have to -- the yard be surround by ss . so we have to undress as we come in . men and woman have to undress completely naked with we little bundle in front of we , and we have to walk in front of these ss people . they have a trestle table . you have to give you name and you age , and walk in front of they .", "quite a few of we . they herd we into the shower room . we have to undress first . we have to leave everything we have -- you know , this gray dress they give we . and only we shoe we could take with we into the shower room .", "and no water come . and then they herd we out again the other side . they give we strip prison garb . INT : so you say you wait and the water do come ? RF : do not come .", "oh , I think , maybe we can work here or -- but we be not allow to talk and ask question . we be march in there , and we be give a injection . we have to undress with we bundle at we foot . we stand there straight , get a injection . and while this injection work , I hear in the camp they go around with loud hailer -- whoever work for the rbr -- you know , the german army -- in Riga should assemble outside .", "the ss girl take we to the lake . and the lake by that time have freeze over , and we have to knock a hole into the lake for we . and they insist that we undress ourselves and wash ourselves . so that be where we stay there , until Christmas of ' 44 , when suddenly we have to march out . we do not know where and what .", "he say , he can not . I can come over . they be go to take you and undress you , take you to the unlousing , and disinfect , wash you and everything . INT : what be the trip like ? nk : and he say , do not worry about it .", "-lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- she be the one that be supposedly shoot . and on top of she be other corpse . when thing get quiet , she creep out of the corpse , naked , and leave . as she be walk in the street in Kiev , she see from far away a policeman . she go down a side street .", "and they be hungry , and they be cold . you could see that . they be almost naked , and have no clothes . Clothes tear -- you know , get destroy in the forest . so I take off a couple shirt for the baby .", "blanket , forget it . they be all go . they throw the strip of cloth -- you know , hole all over the place . God , terrible . and my parent go away somewhere .", "very poor . well , he be a witness to that . because my cousin , Mania , be stand naked at the pit to be kill . and I do not know how it happen . Ivan be stand there , a little -- a little way , you know , watch the procedure .", "they -- they catch a furrier with he wife . and they round up the Jews , a couple hundred of they , in the market . they have -- they have to undress themself and perform a sex act . and we have to stay around around and watch it . INT : be you yourself there , or be you tell this --", "MK : there be plenty of people lay around dead . but if you be dead , you do not look if the guy be circumcise or not . or in the case with woman , they be all naked lay around dead . so you could not , you know , make any different -- you could not draw any conclusion that these people be jewish or something . but the people that escape , get through the war in the forest or the people that remain alive after concentration camp , they tell I the story what -- what really happen , how the Poles help they , how the Poles sell they out to the Germans .", "but I know it be a fact . I know it be a fact , because some people that I meet after the war , they see it . when we come to Birkenau , we be tell to undress in the nude . and there be several kapo . now , a kapo be a guy who be in charge , who be actually a mean guy .", "Sarah , what about you clothes ? be you still wear the same clothes you get from the relative in Kiev ? sb : I get a dress and strip . and then the -lsb- non-english -rsb- , the manager from the village give I a sack from sugar . and I make myself a dress .", "you be say -- eh : -- that we arrive to Belsen-Bergen . and they make we undress , and be take we in a bath through the street in the nude . INT : how do you feel ? eh : like a no , no person , like a nobody , nothing , a nobody .", "INT : how do you feel ? eh : like a no , no person , like a nobody , nothing , a nobody . it be humiliating , completely nude and naked . Street -- there be people on the street walk by . but nobody even pay any attention to we , a bunch of naked girl .", "it be humiliating , completely nude and naked . Street -- there be people on the street walk by . but nobody even pay any attention to we , a bunch of naked girl . they take we , like , 50 , 100 at a time . INT : how far do you --", "they say that they have to go straight to the gas chamber . and so -- so what they do , be they -- they use to take they in the camp in the morning , and late in the evening , and they use it all the time that we be all in bed . and they have they naked . and they would see what they have , if they have anything wrong with they body , or they look -- they be too thin . then they choose which one will go to the gas chamber .", "well , inside , that particular night , that be not so cold . but prior to that , what we have to go through -- well , that be a interesting experience . they -- they bring we to -- in front of a barrack , and they make we undress completely . and mind you , it be , like , the end of October . it be very cold .", "she would say , I will keep it . and under penalty of death , the Germans , they , whenever they find gold , they will kill . and they make the woman and the young girl , -lsb- INAUDIBLE -rsb- to undress . the scream , the holler be terrible . dog and with whip they use to beat the people as you go around .", "and this be empty . and I crawl up , under it . and I start work feverishly , naked . because my clothes be all wet . I fall in the water with the clothes .", "you know , I do not want to belittle . you know , let he rest in peace where he be , or be wherever he be . and lo and behold , I sit down and write 16 page , write tear and blood , tell what have happen to my family , what happen the way they make they go down , the way they make the woman to undress , they way they beat they . and my grandparent be they father and mother . my father -- my grandparent be they father and mother .", "then one day , they be announce the Jews go in to Ozorkow ghetto . but , till we get into the ghetto -- first , they take we to the Reich school , like my -- my son just say -- to the Reich school . they undress we to the -- to nothing . and they brand we . no .", "and then they chase we into the ghetto . INT : who be with you ? BD : my parent , everybody -- naked -- stark naked we all stay together . they brand we , and then they send we home . we go home a few day .", "in the cold weather , we have to stand for hour till they would let we into the shower . first , they shave we body all over , put we into the shower , come out from the shower . we have to stay naked . it be cold outside . the only warmth that we have be we get together , you know , and body warm .", "mf : that be what we be call . we be not call by the name , just by the number . and after the number , we have to stay , again , naked outside till they shave we head . and they give we the clothes , what be wooden shoe , with -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- thin clothes , that -- clothes what you know from the camp , whatever we have . and stay outside again till they bring soup for everybody till they get a little bit of soup .", "and they be bring in food , and they be bring in clothes . and they come to greet all the survivor . at that time , we undress of we stripe , and we put on regular clothes . they bring we clothes . and we keep on go until we come to a hungarian town that be call Debrecen ."]