[{"texts": ["ms : yeah , when we be in the camp . INT : and you be then send directly to shower , be that correct ? ms : then we be into the processing room , where we be strip . INT : do you remember any of the commandant , they name ? ms : no , but another interesting thing in that process .", "mg : yeah . INT : they put you in that room . and they undress you . mg : yeah . INT : do they shower you first before they --", "nobody could come close . so . INT : in you previous description , you describe the undress room , and the gas chamber be below ground . dg : yeah . INT : and could you just describe to I what be above ground , what you -- what you see physically , the building that be there ?", "jf : in the ground , inside the camp ? HA : yes , inside the camp . they tell we to undress . I start to undress , I be already in my underwear , and all of a sudden someone come on a horse . he name be Bitner , SS man .", "ms : no . no . just stay naked and they do not have the facility , how to clean they , so just drip down they leg . INT : be you also undress , naked ? ms : oh , yeah .", "INT : and you be there ? yb : and how do it go ? we go -- we have to be naked . INT : you have to undress ? yb : of course , a number , and again , leave and right .", "no . just stay naked and they do not have the facility , how to clean they , so just drip down they leg . INT : be you also undress , naked ? ms : oh , yeah . I be a naked -lsb- non-english -rsb- when I be there .", "they never bring thing except when really they -- they think it be necessary . and that be when -- and they accommodate . INT : can you describe for I the scene in the undress room once everybody be inside the gas chamber ? what do it look like at that point ? dg : the undress room ?", "and -- INT : what exactly would they do ? would they strip you down ? RZ : not strip , just bent over a stool and lash you in the back , on you buttock . INT : on you bare buttock .", "\\ par -rcb- \\ pard \\ fi720 \\ sl393 \\ tx0 \\ tx0 \\ tx720 \\ tx1440 \\ tx2160 \\ tx2880 \\ tx3600 \\ tx4320 \\ tx5040 \\ tx5760 \\ tx6480 \\ tx7200 \\ tx7920 \\ tx8640 \\ tx9360 -lcb- \\ plain MT : \\ tab they would not do anything to I , so I guess they do not have gay individual there or something , and I be not interesting enough for older woman , for mature woman . I be never molest or make a fool of that way , but I have to undress and run around naked . I would hide around my mother . then would come the time that they turn the water on .", "INT : what exactly would they do ? would they strip you down ? RZ : not strip , just bent over a stool and lash you in the back , on you buttock . INT : on you bare buttock . RZ : not on the bare , no .", "INT : Ditch ? mg : Ditch . they tell they to undress , and then they shoot they , and they fall in -- in the ditch . INT : and they do this -- the whole town ? mg : yes .", "and he tell he , oh , you shit , something like that , you know , in German . everything go through . INT : so you do have from time to time a german officer in there during the undress procedure ? dg : oh , yeah . INT : and be he give order , or be he --", "INT : every morning ? hb : yes . INT : always naked ? hb : almost . yes .", "INT : can you describe for I the scene in the undress room once everybody be inside the gas chamber ? what do it look like at that point ? dg : the undress room ? -lsb- chuckle -rsb- you have to pick up -- we have to pick up everything . everything go to Germany or wherever it be , or ."], "topic_words": [0, "0.266*\"INT\" + 0.260*\"undress\" + 0.062*\"yeah\" + 0.051*\"inside\" + 0.042*\"non-english\" + 0.027*\"nude\" + 0.025*\"describe\" + 0.018*\"dg\" + 0.017*\"mg\" + 0.014*\"ms\""]}, {"texts": ["all of the factory be gear for production for the war . so , we have to improvise and put in two gear , tooth we call it . we have to take out those two that be strip and file they down and put in two in they place . since we do not have anything to weld it , we have to drill a hole into that gear and then set it up with some screw so it will work for the time be . then that other Karp come over and say , `` boy-oh-boy .", "`` at the end of we runway be the biggest God dam barrel -lrb- you will have to censor that -rrb- I have see and it stink . '' `` I will be right down . '' -lrb- laughter -rrb- I put my trailer on my jeep , and I go to the air strip and we unloaded what be a enormous barrel . you think of a barrel as this big . it be three time that big .", "check you ear , put down over there , everything 's -- no hiding -lsb- laugh -rsb- place . so they put I in the -- in a -- in a place like this . you stay just dark and stay naked . they take you out , and somebody check you . put in a finger here , put a finger here , put a finger in the back , in the ass .", "NESSE GODIN Page 2 hole serve as a bathroom , they put some stick on . and the other hole serve as a grave . every morning , the dead be order to be take out , they be have to be under as naked , because the clothing could be recycle , but the people be dump into the hole . Food be give to we very little . you see the Germans do not get at that point allocation food for we for the prisoner .", "they take he away with other people . I and my mother come to a big , big hall . they ask we to take everything off , just to be naked , and put it on the floor . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- that time , somebody tell we -- I do not remember , a woman or a man . they take woman on one side , man on the other , that I should not say that I be my mother 's daughter because they will push -- put I someplace else .", "you have little bit , they would not take you . big guy , I be big but not big like they be . of course , I be skinny but -- we stay there naked and near the clothes , we still have private clothes . only mark it down with red , red mark , political prisoner , understand ? we put the suit on the side and we stay naked .", "one guy from we city be Cholmo . be a big , big guy . and Goett come with two dog , big dog , and he tell he to undress himself . everybody be watch . and he give the order to the two dog -- they tear he apart !", "`` he do not know too much but what he do not know , he make up with he mouth . the first job be a elevator shaft that have to be repair . one of the gear be strip and we either have to buy another gear , which be not available because they quit make those . all of the factory be gear for production for the war . so , we have to improvise and put in two gear , tooth we call it .", "they take we from there . they put we in a barrack . the barrack be not big enough to hold all of we -- still naked . and they make we sit down on the floor in line , like this , one knee to the other , like this -- line , line , line , line . at that night , this -- come that guy , the ss guy , the red one , that we use to call he -lsb- ?", "we walk into a warehouse -- empty warehouse with the stone floor , and there be a big , long table set up . and there be about a dozen ss , Gestapo , in uniform -- the black uniform , the green uniform , the swastika . and we be tell to get undressed , naked . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- about -- oh , I do not know , four foot from the table where they sit , they draw a circle with chalk on the -- on the floor , and they call we , I think , alphabetically . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- can I get up ?", "the other part of the experiment be do in Auschwitz . we would be march there , put in a huge room , maybe 10 set of twin at a time in one room with about 5 or 6 doctor all dress in white coat . they would keep we naked . they would measure every part of we body , compare it . let 's say , put a instrument and squeeze it against we skull to see the size of the head ; then compare it to child 's ; then compare it between each set of twin -- the nose , the ear , the eye , the shape of the face .", "it overwhelm I , really , even though Vienna be a big city , but Antwerp be not , and all of a sudden everything be so big . all but we room . my mother and I have to stay in a little room and get dress and undress on top of the bed . but otherwise , everything be big . and in Greenville it be the other way again .", "but we make we ice skate . Q : you make you own ice skate ? a : we make we own ice skate because all it take be le-leather strap , a piece of wood , and then you go to the local blacksmith and he put a little strip of iron underneath as -- as a runner . and you put the strap -- nail the strap to the piece of wood , and you put it on you foot . it work .", "then we know already what be happen . the big head of the ______ , when the selection be , the big truck come to the lager and people be just , be black . for instance , after a selection for which they make , nude , _______ the naked people be just throw on the platform of this van and take away . these child be just throw on this platform and take away . they collect the child , put in this and that be my twentieth birthday .", "so they put we in a empty room , like 100 at a time . and all of a sudden , like woman dress like nurse come and tell we to turn the face to the wall . you know , a hundred of we , naked . all of a sudden they come out ; and a hundred naked woman on the other side . well , in today 's time , that would make a nice x-rated movie that , would not it ?"], "topic_words": [1, "0.344*\"put\" + 0.126*\"big\" + 0.121*\"naked\" + 0.061*\"guy\" + 0.031*\"sudden\" + 0.029*\"hole\" + 0.027*\"place\" + 0.022*\"floor\" + 0.018*\"empty\" + 0.017*\"set\""]}, {"texts": ["PS : oh yes , oh yes , it , it be a , a sense of embarrassment . but by that time , of course , you know you be strip . I mean , you have go through two year of strip -- you know , no radio , no book , no movie , no music , prescribe place where you can live , curfew . no fur coat be a big deal , no fur coat -- a law that Jews can not have a fur coat . INT : tell I , if you could , when the first deportation begin , and how that start to occur .", "and I certainly know that time be rough ; I know that something be happen in Germany . but I also know that there be a famine in China , you know , so - because there be a famine in China in the 30s , I think - so that I know that there be famine in China and I know there be something go on in Germany , but how that related to my personal life or to we , it be sort of far-fetched . I do begin , during the economic time , I do begin to feel certain pressure , and I do begin to feel certain anti-semitic , well , direct anti-semitic reference to who we be , but that be not on any scale - because as a child , you know , a child can call you a jew and he can call you baldy and he can call you any kind rotten name , and if you can rationalize to yourself within that context , you know how kid fight , and ... so , I be aware of a certain change in atmosphere in Poland because I do know now from study history that there be a wave of anti-semitism that be extremely , to the naked eye , it be easy to see , because , you know , when I translate - I be work on Korchuk -lrb- ph -rrb- a lot , Korchuk 's writing , and I translate he work - I realize that he only , the only reason for he be remove from the position of the good doctor , who read poetry and talk about child upbringe on the radio in the 30s , that he be remove from that position only because of anti- Semitism . he be a very progressive educator , as you know , and a very enlighten man and he be a jew , of course , by birth , but he be very polish in he upbringing and outlook , not christian , but Polish , and he bring all these new idea to Poland , because he study in England , you know , and he bring the new idea , the new approach to child upbringing , because he also write story for child , you know . he write book about child and book for child .", "INT : be that a source of embarrassment or pain when , when you would have to wear that ? PS : oh yes , oh yes , it , it be a , a sense of embarrassment . but by that time , of course , you know you be strip . I mean , you have go through two year of strip -- you know , no radio , no book , no movie , no music , prescribe place where you can live , curfew . no fur coat be a big deal , no fur coat -- a law that Jews can not have a fur coat .", "there be a -- a non-aggression agreement , France and England on this side of Germany , Czechoslovakia on this side , should any -- should one be attack , the other would assist . and at that time , Chamberlain and Daladier decide -- I do not know whether decide , they think if they give in this little bit to Hitler , they avoid World War II . so not only be , in September ' 38 , this border area occupy by the Nazis , they also come beyond the Czech fortification which they have on the border , against the Germans , so now they be stand there naked , without any fa -- without any safety , security or fortification . so it be anticipate that Hitler 's appetite will grow to the point where he will occupy also the Czech land . and the parent of jewish teenager encourage they kid to learn a trade , should immigration become necessary , they can support themselves with work of they hand in a country whose language they do not know .", "in other word , endemic in the structure of modern civilization , of industrialization , be a capability of massive destruction , by mean out of anatomic weapon . Sybil Milton be very , very much take by it . I then subsequently provide to the Holocaust Museum , a collection of document which I assemble , my sister actually help with it , which show methodically how the various law be use in Slovakia to gradually strip a innkeeper , who be a veteran from World War I , and who receive special license to be a innkeeper and how that be take away , and this be take away and the fur coat be take , and radio be take , and so on , until you finally get rid of the innkeeper altogether and then gas he . and I give a collection of something like 30 document , where the wife actually get a receipt for the husband . in other word , the bureaucracy work with perfection and completeness and everything be legitimate and everything be sign and everything be cover by law .", "well , be very near the border of -- of Czechoslovakia occupy , you see , we be quite -- actually , I must correct what I say earlier , that the entire Slovakia be hand over to Hungary . actually , this do not happen . it be more correct that a strip of land alongside the Danube , the northern bank of the Danube , become Hungary . another part , two-third , actually , remain Slovakia , independent , under the leadership of Tiso , who , by the way , be the Archbishop of Slovakia . and he be a ally of Hitler .", "INT : and that be in about 1938 ? lb : yes , 1938 . the area where I live be a strip of land alongside the Danube . and not only , actually , the entire eastern segment of Czechoslovakia which be , by the way , today Slovakia . and that entire area be annex to Hungary as a deal between Hitler and Horthy , the hungarian regent .", "mz : then they start to come out with a ordinance -- be that they be prepare for the war with Russia , they take away all the fur that the people have . not the question of fur coat or fur lining -- anything that they have . even if a coat have a fur collar , you have to strip you collar and deliver the collar to the Germans . it be -lsb- ? Sammelstelle -- ? -rsb-", "and it happen that she go on the Exodus . she go with friend and friend she meet -- the same person Yehaskel -lrb- ph -rrb- benzef -lrb- ph -rrb- , wi -- they get on board and they be on the Exodus , when -- she tell I story , they come to Palestine , they have to go back . when she come back she be first in Aachen , and from Aachen she come back to Vidin -lrb- ph -rrb- , naked -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- because when he leave we buy she clothing , everything , she only have one dress , that be all . we have to buy she everything new again , and she be there -- end of Tape one , side b beginning tape two , side a Q : -- uation of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum volunteer collection interview with Morris Rosen .", "and there be other restriction . a jew law be pass which be stricter than the jew law pass in Germany . you know , in 1935 , the Nuremberg law be pass which strip the citizenship from the Jews of Germany and other restriction . the hungarian jew law be -- go much further . it -- in 1938 , it be pass , very shortly after occupation .", "the eastern part be take away by the Russians . and the western part be take away by the Germans . and only a narrow strip be leave for Poland . and I remember that we question this pact . we wonder , will Germany ever attack Russia ?", "when I go , I n -- maybe I go to visit , you know , for -- for a couple of day , go to the Poland to visit my friend , maybe to go to some , you know , -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- for a few day , because in Poland you -- very nice place , which I know when I be young boy , and nothing else . I be not feel that I would like to move any place . Q : yeah , but when do -- when be you strip of you citizenship ? a : in 19 -- because when I get the passport for three we -- for three month , they let the -- they ask I to -- they have to come back for Poland because my passport expire . they send I the letter if I be not back to the Poland th-they give I -- they would like to give I the passport one way , let I go from the Poland -- from United States to the Poland and then in the Poland I have to put application for the emigration .", "we be in the lineup . and as the people be come out from the checkup and registration , we ask if they -- how do they check . and they say they undress everybody , presumably check if somebody be jewish , so they could check . well , in that case , we decide we can not go to Germany because they would undress we and find out we be Jews and we be finish . Change of tape", "there be no bloodshed or anything . they just come in . in the very begin , I do not know if it be the same day they march in or the next day , all the Jews , right away they zero in on the Jews , we have to meet at the marketplace and right away they start with they decree to strip we of all material possession slowly but very systematically . the first request be for the Jews to give all the gold , maybe all the silver , all the radio , everything that have any material value , carpet , Persian carpet , you would not imagine , fur , fur coat , all sort of thing we have to bring to the marketplace , or whatever , I think it be the marketplace , the Germans take that . and that go on for about a week .", "a : thing change naturally when the war break out , between Germany and France -lrb- that be September 30 , 1939 -rrb- in 1939 . Q : then what happen ? a : we have to report to the -lrb- `` we '' mean all the adult male 17 through 55 , then extend to the age of 60 , within the week , who either be german or have be german before they be strip of they citizenship by the Nuremberg law -rrb- stadium in Paris . the Stadium de Colomb , all the Germans and all the Austrians -lrb- Austria have be annex to Germany in 1938 -rrb- . there be no money to be bring with you ."], "topic_words": [2, "0.067*\"Jews\" + 0.054*\"Germany\" + 0.046*\"Germans\" + 0.044*\"coat\" + 0.041*\"story\" + 0.037*\"Poland\" + 0.030*\"border\" + 0.030*\"ph\" + 0.021*\"change\" + 0.021*\"movie\""]}, {"texts": ["they say , `` we be go to make they scream in pain , and they could not do that . and that get they very angry . and that make they figure out more punishment , and bigger punishment , and longer punishment , and more beating , and no water for the day , and no food for 2 day , and , and , and stand naked be tie to a post in the sun all day , in the hot african sun , and , and put a bucket of ant over you head , and bury you in the sand to you neck and urinate on you head , and beat you head open , and nothing they do could make we make a sound . oh , we want to , but that be the only way would , we could get back at they . if you go to kill we , then you can beat we to death -- go ahead and do it , that be the way it be get to be .", "if you do not look right to the camp commander when he pass by or you do not work hard enough , or this bahis do not beat you hard enough while you be drag in the sand through the desert , he would take you at the end of the day , and he would say , `` Quinze jours --------------------- . '' that mean fifteen day in the , at the fort . they would tie you arm in the back and hang you on you arm naked for about 2 , 3 day you would hang on you arm , and every night they would come in , when it be the coldest , and hose you down with ice cold water , and beat you about , and that be fun for they , they would laugh when they do it . when you get through hang there , and when they cut you down , you be not able to walk , in fact you be lucky to be alive . I go there twice .", "no , no , no ! the the , the , the cruelty , and the , and the , and the barbaric manners of the guard uh , uh , uh , that come out by themselves , nobody tell they to beat we all the time , nobody tell they to chain we together , nobody tell they to beat we up in chain , and whip , and whip we and , and , and , that camp commander in Jaffa in Africa , nobody tell he to deny we water or deny we a piece of bread , or , or not to give we uh , not to have we work uh , uh so much in the hot sun . nobody tell they , not , nobody tell they to tie we naked to a post and beat we , and to hang we by we arm and hose we down , to bury we in the , in the sand so we head should look up and , and , and , and bash they brain in and urinate on they head , nobody tell they to do that . they tell we to keep we there until , until uh , we , we be suppose to be confine and work on the Transaharian . but nobody tell they how much or how hard or how , or what time of day .", "to go to Fort for fifteen day mean water and bread , fifteen day . seventy-five gram of bread a day and a cup of water . they would tie you arm behind you back and hang you on you wrist , like this and they would hang you on you arm , oh for a night , a day , two day , till finally you arm would hang out of the socket , and then they would come in , strip you down in the middle of the night , strip you naked and put the hose on you . and I take the cold that be at night , we get more cold . the hose do not do just a easy job on you .", "and the watch band that be hang down from he pocket be make out of bead , like the Indians make the bead . and these bead make a swastika . so it be a , a green and white strip of bead with the swastika on it . so these people would fence . and like Cyrano , each time when he score -- my friend , John Schporer -- he also hit that band that the watch which be hang down from he pocket with he sword .", "and he order punishment , beating . they have place a -- a special bench they have for beating , for whipping , where you lay down . they strip you pants off , expose you buttock . and two prisoner with whip would beat you . there be 25 whip .", "the camp commander would come in who be a drunkard and a sadist . he would come in every day , pick out ten man and beat they up . tie they to a pole , naked , and whip they with he horse whip , the whip he use for he horse . just to show the rest of we . we be about 4,000 in there .", "that be one of the punishment . the other one , the camp commander would come in every morning . he would take 8 to 10 , 8 to 10 inmate out , strip they naked , tie they to a post and beat they . and where would they beat they mostly ? on they sex organ , where it hurt the most .", "beneath the gallow . they make we grab the dead and drag 'em through the snow to a grave that be dugg out . and then they hang four that be stand naked . and after they hang they , they run we around the building , toward the undress area , again scream and beat . it be dark .", "there be one day we have to decide , we , we , we know we be go to die there because there be really no hope , really , we do not fool ourselves . all along you fool yourself , take a beating , not eat , not drinking , no sleep , worry for you life . we fool ourselves there be uh maybe , maybe a little light at the end of the tunnel , maybe somebody will , we will ----------- somebody that will help we , maybe be a place that we can hide , maybe there be something that we , that they will not catch we or find we or , or beat we or ... in this camp we realize , we really , this be really the end of the line , I mean , how much can you absorb , how much beating , how much hunger , how much thirst , how much lice , we use to kill the lice every morning on the rag we wear , how we walk around naked , we have no ... let 's stop . beep .", "it be the same thing ... the beating , the hunger , the thirst , the heat , the cold . -lrb- pause -rrb- and the beating . he would come in the morning and he would have a dozen people strip naked and and whip they in front of the rest of they just because he like it and he would stand there smile . the slightest infraction of the rule ... they would bury you in the sand , just you head stick out and the Arabs would urinate on you , and if you move you head , they would open you skull . they have little trick like that .", "nobody move until , I do not remember the exact time , but it be after 8:00 , until we finally hear scream and yell . and apparently , the military and the police have enter the hut of the single man , which -- who usually stay separately somewhere . and they just drag they out of bed , naked or not naked . they beat they up pretty heavily , blood be flow all over , and drag they out . and there be big scream and yell and cry and what have you .", "they make we grab the dead and drag 'em through the snow to a grave that be dugg out . and then they hang four that be stand naked . and after they hang they , they run we around the building , toward the undress area , again scream and beat . it be dark . it be very , very cold .", "that mean you be you brother 's keeper . if somebody run away next to you , you be responsible . so they hang four girl , and we stay for two day like this and watch they hang naked . this be the worst thing in we life . and they take we out for walk sometimes .", "he take they all three out , and he beat they severely , you know , with some kind of whip . he make he walk to a point , you know , only maybe 100 , 200 foot . make they undress , he be beat they . it be a -- he get they help , they rip they clothes and he shoot they . just like that ."], "topic_words": [3, "0.120*\"make\" + 0.120*\"day\" + 0.080*\"beat\" + 0.050*\"whip\" + 0.045*\"hang\" + 0.044*\"arm\" + 0.039*\"scream\" + 0.031*\"finally\" + 0.019*\"shot\" + 0.017*\"terribly\""]}, {"texts": ["and when morning come , you know , the ground of Bergen-Belsen be litter with corpse , of all stage of decay . and I be see where we sleep , next to the corpse . in front of I there be some pyramid of dead , where -- where the body be strip of clothing . we call the pyramid of Dead . and they be hoist up , you know , in a shape of a pyramid -- and that horrible corpse , of all stage of decay .", "Q : what be it like for you to into these camp ? what do you see ? a : well , I be sure that everbody by this time have see the photograph of what the camp look like and body lie in the dust , naked , a little item of clothing on , many of they not move , some of they stir , mostly bone ; human being , man weigh fifty , sixty pound . the medical troops come in at the same time , people be be hose down with the hose hold up with one hand and I have do that too -- hose they with the hose hold in one hand and hold up a man in the other hand who weigh about 40 or 50 pound and be nothing but bone . and then of course the pile of body in front of the crematoria stack up like cordwood , and on the on the cart that be drag they to the crematoria , these open cart just load with body , hand and arm hang out on all side .", "half-burned body be still in the oven where they have be leave as the Germans flee . beside the oven be the emaciated body of prisoner they have not have time to burn . they be naked , stack like cordwood as you would you fireplace wood . further down be slat-sided cart that be also fill with body . these cart be use to bring the body from the gas chamber .", "they take she away in Bergen-Belsen they do not take the people and burn they or put ` em , or bury they , they just pile they up outside of the barracks in front of we door , and the pile be as high as 6 or 7 foot of corpse in , in front of each barracks we live with the dead people , and this be where Christian be . and for day , I could not look at Christian because I know she be lay there , and one day , my guilt be bother I so because I know she be there and I would not look at she , I decide to go see she . and when I look up at she , I see Christian , but something worry I and puzzle I , and I do not know what be wrong , and I say uh , somebody steal she skirt , and she be lay from waist down , naked as a skeleton , which they call in Au -- in Bergen-Belsen be a musselman , which mean uh , before you die you be skin and bone , you look like a musselman which be a skeleton , and she be a skeleton lay there , and she have a navy blue jacket , but the navy blue jacket be not blue , it be grayish or white , and it puzzle I , I say , why would somebody steal a skirt and change a jacket from a blue one to a white one , and not take everything and just leave it there , so I lean over closer to the pile of the dead people , and there I see that Christian blue jacket be cover with terrible lice . the lice be a big as the black ant that you see sometimes in ground , and they be just crawl all over Christian 's body and the jacket , and , and that make that blue navy jacket white , and I could not take it anymore , I almost fall on the dead , on the dead people myself , I be in such shock . and I just run away because I , I be in terrible shock , I , I , I see the terrible lice eat she up , and it it be just too much for I to take , and I never look at Christian again .", "Q : Either one . a : with the body and , you know , ready to be cremate . we be show the gas chamber and the stack of body , naked body so high and the cart or wagon fill with they in addition to the stack on the ground all around . then we be take to one of the nazi administrator 's office , probably a commanding office , I be not sure , and they point out this lamp shade make out of human skin , and it be a terrible thing . I be about to cry .", "during the night , if you want -- you have to get up , to get out to the latrine , the latrine be full of dead people -- stack up . naked -- naked corpse , stack up like wood , one on top of the other , because people be die during the night . and they be pull they out , undress they , put they -- stack they up , because , you know , after a couple of hour , the body get stiff . and they be stack up just like wood , this way and this way . so when you get in during the night , -lsb- INAUDIBLE -rsb- you will -- you will find all these corpse .", "and this be it . during the night , if you want -- you have to get up , to get out to the latrine , the latrine be full of dead people -- stack up . naked -- naked corpse , stack up like wood , one on top of the other , because people be die during the night . and they be pull they out , undress they , put they -- stack they up , because , you know , after a couple of hour , the body get stiff . and they be stack up just like wood , this way and this way .", "and that be still fill with body that they have burn up . and on the outside be pile and pile of bone . we see a building there where they give they a cake of soap , strip they , tell they to take a shower , and they turn on the gas , the gas chamber . there be another building where there be woman and child , woman lie on the floor close together , baby , child that look like they be 50 year old , with the bloated tummy from starvation . it be -- it be a horrible , horrible sight .", "and I manage always to sneak in the ghetto and sneak out and come and go . INT : you would leave the ghetto ? js : very often -- I use to leave in the -- instead , I see child lie dead on the street , grow people lie dead on the street , naked because somebody take they clothes off already and the horse-drawn wagon that pass by and pick up the body and pile they on a wagon , horse-drawn wagon . two man would pick they up like you pick up garbage over here and then bury they in a common grave outside a ghetto in a cemetery , over -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . and I start sneak out the ghetto .", "just load with human body . most of they Jews , at this particular point in time . and all naked . they apparently have be cart from Warsaw or someplace in these boxcar , and the flatcar , of course , be stack with human body . the boxcar be open and when the door open , the one that be dead next to the door fall out on the ground .", "je : yes . we have a twelve unit dispensary assign to special troops of the 79th Infantry Division and all twelve of we , the twelve man , major g\u00f6rki -lsb- phonetic -rsb- who command it , and myself , Captain Eingorn , and we go together . and we see just pile of body , nothing , most of they naked , and practically skeleton . very , very undernourished . and then we see the railroad tie where they have just pile up the body , with beechwood , and then coat they with beechwood creosote and would be burn they .", "it be not the practice , apparently , to cremate every day . a concrete building be use as a temporary rest place . here the body be strip and pile up like cordwood . it seem incomprehensible , but 40 body be there , stone dead , stack four high and sprinkle with lime . all be similar to the body previously describe .", "if you go into a row -- between a row of barracks , andw what -- and there be dead body . you have to step over or around -- or around dead body . usually they be naked . and what have happen , they be people that have die during the night , and the other inmate would just take they outside . and they have a detail of inmate whose job be to go to take these -- gather up these body , and put they in the stack .", "both room be still fill high with gas , shoot , hang , and tortured dead body , a sight I shall never forget . most all body in the room number three be dress in prison clothing , striped suit . yet , but all body in room number one be naked . oh darling , it be a horrible sight . the gas chamber be a room with airtight steel door label , shower bath . '", "it be like a giant cesspool . the sturdiest structure in the camp be the weirdly efficient crematorium . outside of the crematorium , I see a long flatbed trailer load with four layer of naked , starve body . at least 200 tiny adult corpse , weigh 40 to 60 pound each , I guess , be stack and tie like cord wood await the oven . this gruesome shipment have be transport along the german highway almost cover with canvas , but open enough to see under ."], "topic_words": [4, "0.216*\"body\" + 0.098*\"dead\" + 0.041*\"lay\" + 0.037*\"burn\" + 0.032*\"pile\" + 0.032*\"skin\" + 0.028*\"terrible\" + 0.026*\"lie\" + 0.023*\"stack\" + 0.022*\"horrible\""]}, {"texts": ["ukrainian guard in black uniform would kick inmate and they habit be to kick inmate until they curl up on the ground or be too ill to respond . I do not know how many people die under these kick outburst but I know that they injure many people in that process . when we arrive at the showering process and delousing as they would call it , we go through a room whereby we head be -- we be give a crew cut and the Germans or the ukrainian guard at that time would spit on we head to give they the ability to shave a stripe from front to back so it would wind up like a one to two inch stripe run through a otherwise crew cut , there would be a shave strip . I suppose that this be do so that we would not be able to escape . so in the Gross-Rosen camp , we receive this crew cut and a shave strip through the middle , run from front to back of the head .", "when we arrive at the showering process and delousing as they would call it , we go through a room whereby we head be -- we be give a crew cut and the Germans or the ukrainian guard at that time would spit on we head to give they the ability to shave a stripe from front to back so it would wind up like a one to two inch stripe run through a otherwise crew cut , there would be a shave strip . I suppose that this be do so that we would not be able to escape . so in the Gross-Rosen camp , we receive this crew cut and a shave strip through the middle , run from front to back of the head . the situation inside the Gross-Rosen camp , as I describe before , whenever there be a chance for the ukrainian guard to kick anyone , they enjoy that . I do not recall any killing or hanging inside that camp .", "open-air latrine . we stand there for what seem a very long time . I believe we be eventually order to strip totally and in the nude march to a delousing showering facility , a cleaning facility . the guard would kick , if I recall correctly , these be Ukrainians that be on the inside of that concentration camp . ukrainian guard in black uniform would kick inmate and they habit be to kick inmate until they curl up on the ground or be too ill to respond .", "and there we be in Gross-Rosen itself . once we come out of the shower , we face a battery of -- of guard who be give we a crew cut . after the crew cut , they -- the guard attempt to shave we -- shave a 2-inch strip from front to back on the head . and evidently , this be design so to keep we from be able to flee from the concentration camp . as the guard be shave that 2-inch inch strip from front to back , they would spit on we head to make that shave process possible .", "after the crew cut , they -- the guard attempt to shave we -- shave a 2-inch strip from front to back on the head . and evidently , this be design so to keep we from be able to flee from the concentration camp . as the guard be shave that 2-inch inch strip from front to back , they would spit on we head to make that shave process possible . sometimes before , while we be still at Oskar Schindler 's factory , we do receive a tattoo . the tattoo be not a number , but it be a big kl .", "Q : how long have this be since you arrive at Dachau ? a : maybe a couple of month later ... maybe May , or April of 1941 . suddenly we see far away naked woman run ... it be far away , but I could see it be woman , naked . run for the S.S. ... the S.S. be stand and they be run ... be a selection of woman ... far away , of the same place , but far away . I do not know what happen to they .", "it be just one absurd thing after another , it be like a world completely topsy-turvy , it be just . and when we be stand there naked , wait to be process or whatever , the woman run by naked , scream . the same , we woman who get separate from we and who do not have child and who be select for labor , but my mother tell I many a year later , she say , I see you , but I be naked and you be naked so I would not say anything , ? _ or anything . and then eventually a ss who be process they and who be chase they to the shower , he pull down the curtain for they so they would not have to be there , expose , naked .", "and he come in , and he bring a piece of bread , and tell that german guy who be the blockalteste or a kapo who be the meanest thing , a sadist -- a definite sadist because he do thing to we which I do not even think the Germans would ask he to do . he be a german prisoner , of criminal or what . he make we run barefoot at 2 o'clock the night , naked in the block , all of we . then we run back . then he come 4 o'clock up , whatever we be cover with , not much .", "and I recall during April of 1970 , after the intrusion into Cambodia and a few other event that happen in the ` 70s , I still recall some graduate student all exercise and upset over the military , and that it be go to widen the war in Viet Nam , and the chinese and Russians be go to come in by all of we activity and I say , `` no . '' and I recall tell some rabid , very active group here that I be more concerned about what be happen in Egypt . they be pooh-pooh , over whether the russian mig be buzz the israeli plane on the Gaza strip , and they be ready to take over , until we get word to the egyptian government about what the Russians be do , and they kick they out . but that save the Middle East . otherwise , the Russians be ready to take over .", "when we come there to the kitchen the guard search I and another two girl , and he find the two potato . so I be punish by give I 25 with a rubber whip on my body ; 25 time he hit I with a rubber on my body , and then I have some hair grow back . so for punishment and to dehumanize I , he make I here like a strip , to cut like a strip , so one side be a little bit of hair and the other side a little bit of hair . NL : this be a german ? mp : this be the Germans , the guard , the Germans .", "NL : by a ukrainian ? ns : yes . he hit he and he say , `` make believe you be dead , '' and he fall down in the ditch , with dead body on top of he , with blood run all over the place , and when everything quiet down , he run away naked . he be wound , with blood . he run away in a cornfield to another town and another town , they catch he over there , and they beat he up , and they give he to the main authority , and he wind up be in a concentration camp and survive , and he tell the whole story .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- this be the end of the forge identity . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and eventually , after two minute or so , they run you out , or they run you out of the shower room . and there be another barrack that you have to run through , naked . and some people be throw some clothing article at you , which be totally , I mean , out of place and out of size . and most of these thing have a lot of paint .", "do not know what they -- what rank they have , in they shiny boot with helmet , arm , of course , two on the front , two on the side , and two at the back . and I think of myself , whom be they guard so -- they just guard if someone would run away from this truck . and there be -- it be the middle of winter , very cold , and there be naked child , you could see -- that be what I want from memory to paint , if I can do it -- you could see frozen , and hear scream . because underneath it , all the child , they take out . I can not say exactly how many there be .", "the other one run in the other corner . we do not run for the other one . and I just naked the way I be . and I run into a farmer . INT : you be naked ?", "-lsb- laugh -rsb- after , every three people get one towel . now you can -- and after , they put we out , run , run , run , run . how -- maybe , I do not know , half mile , to another barracks , naked , wet . one give you a pull-over . one give a shirt , and one give we shoe ."], "topic_words": [5, "0.227*\"run\" + 0.132*\"naked\" + 0.066*\"back\" + 0.064*\"cover\" + 0.054*\"guard\" + 0.037*\"Germans\" + 0.028*\"process\" + 0.022*\"front\" + 0.021*\"give\" + 0.019*\"middle\""]}, {"texts": ["and now , my -- my -- all my trouble start , because now I be not anymore protect from selection . and there be a big selection in the camp . and my mother -- naked . and we block by block have to go to selection . and Dr. Mengele be the one that be make the selection .", "Q : you have be transport to ? a : I be transport fr ... to many , many camp . from camp to camp , from camp to camp , because , as I say , the Germans be build little air strip , so always a few hundred man be in a certain , out of a village , like they have a , they have a shack make out of metal and they keep we there . but on the last day of war , like maybe it be know already to you that they put all the inmate on a dead march , and I be among also they , a dead march . we be march and march and march and march , thousand of , of people , of man , thousand of they , and everyday there be less and less and less and less .", "another thing happen to I once . I come back -- I be 16 and very skinny , and use to have selection . selection be you strip half naked and a gentleman say -- there be left and right . selection be very sensitive -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- among people who be in concentration camp . and somehow I size up that he send I with the weaker one .", "and , and I see these thing happen because there be certain time where , where ss soldier be bring to concentration camp for not fulfil the order that they receive . I do not know exactly what the order be . like one very high rank officer come to concentration camp and he be strip of the uniform , put on concentration camp uniform , shave the head , and we have to speak to he . he say , `` well , I be a very high rank officer and I come home on vacation and my wife and the child be deport to a camp . '' he say , `` why ? ''", "RF : yes . INT : where these selection -- can you describe one of the selection ? RF : I -- I do not think -- well , there be send at he whim -- some woman -- the selection be often make when we be naked . so some that be robust and -- and healthy look be send to the good side to work . and those be skinny to the -- be when they be go with the transport .", "a : that be the extermination barracks . about two or three week later , I happen to be fortunate to meet Dr. Mengele who be overlook this last transfer where I belong if there be anyone strong enough to be send out . that be the so-called selection where I be stand naked with many hundred other raise my left arm . we have to raise we left arm because that be show whether we rib show under the skin . if we be too thin there be no point in send we out and give we a piece of bread and take we to force labor because we could not stand it .", "let 's see , he say , those who return from the concentration camp , from the ghetto in Transnistria -lrb- ph -rrb- ? a : yeah . Q : Transnistria , or from the force labor camp , be naked , poor and without shelter . but they carry in they heart , the star of hope and unshaken faith in the new world in which they would find the place they deserve , the place that suit they . that sound , to I ...", "or group ? anything like that , when they pass by you or ... ? a : well , when they be take there be selection hold , you know , selection hold once in a while see who still have some meat on they , like everyone have to get naked outside you know , and mengeledr . Mengele come out , and you have to present yourself , either you be send to the barrack or send on the side . the one that send on the side , they go to block number seven , seven , and they put a `` l '' on they here .", "so , you arrive in -- in Auschwitz and you say that you do not go through initial selection . a : I do not . Q : you sel -- selection happen when you be already naked , and -- a : oh , no , I -- I -- there be -- there be a selection right away . Q : mm-hm , on the ramp ?", "INT : then Mengele come . GL : oh , yes . and we have to undress on the pretext of a medical check up . Dr. Mengele ask I to turn around . he notice these pimple , and -- and send I over there .", "of course , we do not know when the selection would be . but all of a sudden , in most case on a Sundays , cause everyone be in , in the camp . the whole camp be take out to Appellplatz , to roll call place , line up in row of five , strip naked , and you clothing be drop by you in front of you foot . and Mengele , with the , with the Lager ... Lager\u00e4ltester , who be a prisoner , and the Lagerf\u00fchrer , and also the commandant ; they would go from barrack to barrack , block to block . and behind Mengele be a prisoner registrar -- a Schreiber what they call -- and as Mengele would , this be how , how it would be .", "what do you mean by that ? `` seleczia '' mean a selection of people , they have we all undress and Mengele , you hear about Mengele , the one that be be film now , would you believe that he clap I like this on my back , that bastard . one day , they assemble we all , naked , and Hela , Rusha 's sister , have two other girl at the Plaszow camp , we keep together , Manya and I , and we always try to keep Manya between Hela and I , Rusha 's sister and I , because Manya have scar , from operation , and if he see a scar , or a pimple on somebody , and you do not look good anymore , you go here ; you do not know where you be go , but we assume . so we try to keep Manya between we , but he say `` March , march '' , so when I come by he say to I `` die vet noch gut arbeit leissen '' that I will produce a lot of work yet , so we all go by and we be lucky , we could go and get dress again . but then , this , be this in April 1944 ?", "the whole camp , that be a miserable time , outside , wait and wait in the cold , before go to work and then there be the selection . now the selection , that be the worst . the worst event in camp life , when the , everybody be consign into the barracks in the evening and everybody have to go in front of a ss , naked and then he decide if we be too weaks and so forth . that be the end , you do not go to work the next day , but you would go in a truck and the truck would take you to Birkenau , to Auschwitz . that be , I see some act of heroism , also some people go instead of another , to pass in front of the ss and give a phony number , they risk they life to save other people .", "a : yes , yes , he be aware of that , because as a matter of fact I be friendly with he . he be always a cook , and he always cook . so after when we would send food from one camp to another camp , I be maybe in 15 of they , but I do not know the location because they use to send boy to build air strip . it mean take big stone , break they up , make gravel , and then cover with cement . and every camp have a little kitchen .", "and Mengele -- Dr. Mengele from -- from Auschwitz come , with some other guy , and they have table set up . and we have stand there naked . all -- everybody be naked . and they have like file with paper . and everybody have to march down the aisle ."], "topic_words": [6, "0.310*\"camp\" + 0.109*\"selection\" + 0.081*\"send\" + 0.058*\"Mengele\" + 0.049*\"concentration\" + 0.036*\"anymore\" + 0.035*\"march\" + 0.023*\"Birkenau\" + 0.019*\"Dr.\" + 0.017*\"happen\""]}, {"texts": ["at that time , I be 16 -- over 16 , and the embarrassment be still very big . interviewer 2 : of be naked ? SUBJECT : of be naked , and -- and they would go around the one have develop better the body , or bigger bust . look for stronger people , and this today , maybe , it be a different story , but that time it be -- I can not even tell you that much because I never -- I just remember my aunt be with I -- the one that live with I , and many time we be look for a little red brick to color the cheek to look healthy , so I remember many time she be do this to I , and so these selection be very degrading . interviewer 2 : and that for you , it be not a matter of living or die , but this degredation , the shame of be there .", "you know , when I go through the selection and they be say , this be Mengel this -- I never look at he . at that time , I be 16 -- over 16 , and the embarrassment be still very big . interviewer 2 : of be naked ? SUBJECT : of be naked , and -- and they would go around the one have develop better the body , or bigger bust . look for stronger people , and this today , maybe , it be a different story , but that time it be -- I can not even tell you that much because I never -- I just remember my aunt be with I -- the one that live with I , and many time we be look for a little red brick to color the cheek to look healthy , so I remember many time she be do this to I , and so these selection be very degrading .", "stryy -lsb- polish : stryj -rsb- be a big city and there be one Gestapo be there and there be about five Ukrainians . they tell we to undress . we undress . and at that time one ukrainian hit I in my throat with the fist and I be start to choke and when he want to hit I again , the Gestapo man start to yell at he , forbid to hit . Yah .", "02:08:02 anyway , they take we to the ... uh ... uh ... ss office where Gestapo be over there . stryy -lsb- polish : stryj -rsb- be a big city and there be one Gestapo be there and there be about five Ukrainians . they tell we to undress . we undress . and at that time one ukrainian hit I in my throat with the fist and I be start to choke and when he want to hit I again , the Gestapo man start to yell at he , forbid to hit .", "ns : good Friday be a very , very solemn day for they , and a very frightful day for we , because at that time the hate be more outspoken . Jesus be crucify , and so , I remember , that even in school they use to teach in front of we , and we be also punish in school many time , stand I remember for nothing . like we use to be punish , the punishment be to stand in a corner , and hot , dry corn , be throw on the floor , and we have to stay on we naked knee on the corn with we hand up . and now you know what be happen . it be not a lot of corn , it be like ten different piece .", "that be what we be tell . then they take we to the shul and also to the -- to the elementary school too . so that be the first time that my eye start to open up , because come the nighttime , you start to undress . you do not know if you should undress , you should not undress , and all these strange people . I mean , we be very shy , very family-oriented .", "then they take we to the shul and also to the -- to the elementary school too . so that be the first time that my eye start to open up , because come the nighttime , you start to undress . you do not know if you should undress , you should not undress , and all these strange people . I mean , we be very shy , very family-oriented . I mean , we be not like use to it , see naked man or naked -- thing like that .", "I have a jacket -- a striped jacket . it be go . I be practically naked , lie around there . they take I up , put I away in the -- this be March , in 1945 , March . and I be lie there , and I start -- I be lie , I remember , still , cry , cry , cry -- nothing else but cry .", "and this be a emergency door . when he run out I shoot after he , and I hit he in the spine , and he fall down . now we be naked . my brother do not know what be go on . so he start to yell to they , `` what you play with firecracker ?", "and this be a emergency door . when he run out I shoot after he , and I hit he in the spine , and he fall down . now we be naked . my brother do not know what be go on . so he start to yell to they , `` what you play with firecracker ?", "I do not have my twin -- because he be ... we be not of the same sex so it be a little harder . but throughout all the time in the hospital and through experiment and through horrible time , I always feel that Rene be alive and I say that I have to stay alive to take care of he . this be like my mission in life and I very clearly remember umm ... stand on line -- it be always cold , of course -- and we be go into the shower , stand naked and again . I bring up the locket -- for a long time , I be miraculously able to hang on , hide the fact that I have this locket , and always put it back on after I come out of the shower . I also remember that somehow I know already that not everybody come out of the shower , so every time we be line up like this , I remember that fear , like oh my God , be this the last time ?", "and I be aware of many other name , from letter , photograph , occasional visit from out of town . Q : well , d-do -- do letter that you still have today , or those be the letter that you remember from the pre-war time ? a : no , I think too many time I be , like I have to undress and throw all my -- whatever I have and start from the beginning with -- with nothing from before . I have a picture of my family , it survive -- it survive in someone 's hand in Palestine , and I think that I have it on I . Q : oh , oh , that be great .", "before . no . we -- we start to run before -- before we undress . like I -- I start to play around , you know , with the knot , with the string . instead of open up the belt to get undressed , I start to play around .", "naturally you be confront with a situation which I suppose create a period in we life which at that time which at that time of complete despair or complete inability to cope with you own survival , and that be why during the very early period , I remember distinctly , many people in my block walk into a loaded wire because they psychologically could not cope with that first period that you be not a human being , that you be worse than a animal . they just could not cope with it and they be run every day i remember notice people hang on these laded wire , who just could not take it , and that be the very early part , the first few day of we be there . Q : when you first start see this , as you say , the murder , the strip of one dignity , how be you able little by little to cope ? a : good question . I have ask myself this many , many time .", "a : excuse I ? Q : the house you be live in be near that ; be that what you be tell I ? a : the house we live in in Landsberg be Lech , all this -- you know , in the Bible , in the Bible be write Abraham 's house be a house for the hungry , for the naked , for the poor . everybody who go in in Abraham 's house , he get a meal and clothing and dress and everything . we house be Abraham 's house ."], "topic_words": [7, "0.329*\"time\" + 0.134*\"remember\" + 0.115*\"start\" + 0.045*\"cry\" + 0.026*\"hit\" + 0.026*\"yell\" + 0.021*\"school\" + 0.020*\"today\" + 0.015*\"play\" + 0.012*\"color\""]}, {"texts": ["answer : well , I can tell you something that tie right in to the day of liberation . one of the side element of the air war be a effort by the ally to disturb the german communication , and for a time they would drop lot of uh little strip of black paper with aluminum foil attach to they , which I guess uh disrupt radar and what happen I guess uh fly through a radar net that otherwise might detect plane that be come through , so we kid make a game of this . and we would go out in the field and hunt all those strip of paper and use they for art project . I still have a calendar for example that that where I make the backing out of out of those little bit of paper which we call silver paper . and the area in which we be , atypical for the Netherlands , be solidly catholic .", "question : before I ask you about the liberation , be there anything else , any particular story that you remember about the time that you live with the Janssens that you would like to to tell now ? answer : well , I can tell you something that tie right in to the day of liberation . one of the side element of the air war be a effort by the ally to disturb the german communication , and for a time they would drop lot of uh little strip of black paper with aluminum foil attach to they , which I guess uh disrupt radar and what happen I guess uh fly through a radar net that otherwise might detect plane that be come through , so we kid make a game of this . and we would go out in the field and hunt all those strip of paper and use they for art project . I still have a calendar for example that that where I make the backing out of out of those little bit of paper which we call silver paper .", "and then I have something else that you should explain to everybody , because before you leave -- explain what this be , please . a : now , I have to do the laundry , because that be in -- but all the other woman have to do something , and like I say , there be nothing any more in the Netherlands , so all those other woman have to sit on long table , that be also the table where we have to eat , and on bench , and they have a rusty cup for themself , and it be water in it , and they get long strip of brown paper , and you know , when you go shopping , for food shopping , then you get those big brown bag , that type of paper . and they get long strip , and they have to dump that in the water in strip , and then wind it . and they have every day to do 60 meter -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- little bit , I think 70 yard or so . and that be then dry , and when it be dry it be roll in roll , and they sell it as twine .", "Q : Interesting . and then I have something else that you should explain to everybody , because before you leave -- explain what this be , please . a : now , I have to do the laundry , because that be in -- but all the other woman have to do something , and like I say , there be nothing any more in the Netherlands , so all those other woman have to sit on long table , that be also the table where we have to eat , and on bench , and they have a rusty cup for themself , and it be water in it , and they get long strip of brown paper , and you know , when you go shopping , for food shopping , then you get those big brown bag , that type of paper . and they get long strip , and they have to dump that in the water in strip , and then wind it . and they have every day to do 60 meter -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- little bit , I think 70 yard or so .", "he do say that a war start . Hitler invade Poland , and a mobilization be in order and ... uh ... he be the latest news from the Burgermeister 's office , Mayor 's office , I would say . and he advise to glue in strip of paper on the window so they should not shatter if the bomb fall down , and that be the news . so people start to pick up newspaper , cut it in strip , and glue in and some people do prepare dry bread ; and so it be in we place too . and later I remember plane come .", "Hitler invade Poland , and a mobilization be in order and ... uh ... he be the latest news from the Burgermeister 's office , Mayor 's office , I would say . and he advise to glue in strip of paper on the window so they should not shatter if the bomb fall down , and that be the news . so people start to pick up newspaper , cut it in strip , and glue in and some people do prepare dry bread ; and so it be in we place too . and later I remember plane come . I remember polish plane shoot down , and the next I remember my family be move out from the town , hide in a village from the bomb .", "after I come -- after the war , after it be -- everything be do -- after I come , I find out all about they make a -- like a tree from -- from a -- like a -- a tree -- like a -- a round -- a tree -- a round thing with one entrance . and in the inside they ask all the people to undress . some people do not want to undress . undressed -- I imagine they want still to save the -- the -- the clothes from the people to save for themself . to save or to give away or to whatever they want to do .", "they say they have a undress place . after I come -- after the war , after it be -- everything be do -- after I come , I find out all about they make a -- like a tree from -- from a -- like a -- a tree -- like a -- a round -- a tree -- a round thing with one entrance . and in the inside they ask all the people to undress . some people do not want to undress . undressed -- I imagine they want still to save the -- the -- the clothes from the people to save for themself .", "they ask a few people to take he -- take he across and they kill he right there and then . people who be in the hospital and it be sa -- in the hospital , they all bring they on horse and buggy down there and to come across the hill and they take he down there . they say they have a undress place . after I come -- after the war , after it be -- everything be do -- after I come , I find out all about they make a -- like a tree from -- from a -- like a -- a tree -- like a -- a round -- a tree -- a round thing with one entrance . and in the inside they ask all the people to undress .", "and all these little kid keep jump on we train ask for cigarette . and then we arrive in Portugal . not in Lisbon , but at the other end of this long , narrow strip of Portugal , I guess . it sort of ensconce that part of the world there . it be at the left end of Spain , it be a long strip and that be Portugal .", ". we live in abandon farmhouse I remember . we also -- I be also put on -- they call Commando -- to a place call Rzekne and while I be there , I be ... I come in contact with Boleslav Michovsky who have become fairly well know in this country because he be the carpenter in Minneola that be accuse of the war crime -- as a war criminal and then I guess he lose -- be strip of he citizenship and be suppose to be deport and he be now on trial in Germany for he crime . probably now he be in he eighty so he will probably never ... never make it but in any event , that . .", "they be teach how to make woman 's hair net . it be a fashionable thing at that time to do . they be take the car inner-tube or truck inner-tube and cut into small strip , very narrow strip . then they could buy white silk and then they be die the silk different color . be it a gold , gray , brown or black or navy blue .", "not in Lisbon , but at the other end of this long , narrow strip of Portugal , I guess . it sort of ensconce that part of the world there . it be at the left end of Spain , it be a long strip and that be Portugal . and we be let out in a little town at night call Pampelhosia . np : yes , would you know how to spell that ?", "and if you do any , any problem , or if you do not go to mass on Sunday , he will punish by put a bag of dry bean he have in a corner of the classroom , and the kid have to kneel holding , 45 minute of class , on the bean . and I can tell you that after you get up , you could not walk -- so that type of education . also we have nun that teach we , or teach , anyway , the -- the christian child , rigorously , that you should not look at yourself in the mirror ever -- ever look at yourself naked in the mirror . when you get dress , get dress that you do not see yourself . it be sinful to look at yourself .", "to save or to give away or to whatever they want to do . so some people decide no , kill we with we clothes . but this be a undress place . be make out of brick , actually . like a -- like a -- a -- a round -- a tute -- a round thing and one entrance ."], "topic_words": [8, "0.107*\"long\" + 0.104*\"strip\" + 0.047*\"war\" + 0.041*\"black\" + 0.033*\"paper\" + 0.032*\"save\" + 0.030*\"guess\" + 0.026*\"make\" + 0.022*\"bag\" + 0.022*\"tree\""]}, {"texts": ["` dedicate to all those whose voice have be silence forever in the Holocaust from 1933 'til 1945 . when age of civilization crumble to dust and death be rage supreme , when the devil be crown by the power of deceit , then freedom be a faraway thing . when all that you have love be take from you and you be strip to the bare bone , when all moral boundary and law be break , then you be in hell with satan alone . when jew be depict as subhuman , as vermin , and brute force and evil prevail , when doctor and nurse turn child to corpse , then all logic and reason fail . when the whole world remain dead silent , with the exception of just a few , then they grant Satan license and opportunity to murder in the gas chamber a god-loving jew .", "I write this poem May 11 , 1980 . when age of civilization crumble to dust and death be rage supreme when the Devil be crown by the power of deceit then freedom be a far away dream . when all that you love be take from you and you be strip to the bare bone when all moral boundary and law be break then you be in hell with satan alone . when jew be depict as sub-human , as vermin and brute force and evil prevail when nazi doctor turn child to corpse then all logic and reason fail . when the whole world remain dead silent with the exception of just a few then they grant Satan license and opportunity to murder in the gas chamber a god-loving jew .", "and again I have to caution you to realize what that mean back in the 30 and in Berlin we be so , so simple , so naive . and then when we be transfer to the big hospital , the rumor go that , `` Dr. Lustig will inspect all the student nurse completely naked . and only the one that he like naked he would take in . '' of course it be a stupid rumor , and it do not occur at all , but that be he , he aura . that be he reputation .", "and I remember so well , when we first come to the hospital , we be in Niedersh\u00f6nhausen , student -- we be 17 , 18 year old . and again I have to caution you to realize what that mean back in the 30 and in Berlin we be so , so simple , so naive . and then when we be transfer to the big hospital , the rumor go that , `` Dr. Lustig will inspect all the student nurse completely naked . and only the one that he like naked he would take in . '' of course it be a stupid rumor , and it do not occur at all , but that be he , he aura .", "bei laufen . next day the Americans come into town and the farmer take I back in and they bring I to the Americans . now , anybody who do not live through be eat alive by lice will not understand that but when I come to the American , they undress I and they throw DDT and like the whole world stand still . I must go back , because when I come to the farmer , they take my ... my striped jacket out ... off , and they give I some ... some of they civilian clothes and they bury it ' it _ be so infested with lice , but I remember when they put I back I on the wagon to carry I to the Americans , I take like a visual picture of the farm because when I be lib ... liberate later on I come back and i. . .", "INT : what exactly would they do ? would they strip you down ? RZ : not strip , just bent over a stool and lash you in the back , on you buttock . INT : on you bare buttock . RZ : not on the bare , no .", "fk : I think so . PS : how long do you remain in Europe after the german surrender ? fk : well , after surrender , as I say we would be send over back toward France to Trier to do the strip of power , electrical thing for the French . then we be send down to Regensburg , which be over very next to Czechoslovakia . and there we be tell to sit down and keep ourselves out of trouble until they find boat space for we to go down through the Suez .", "and -- INT : what exactly would they do ? would they strip you down ? RZ : not strip , just bent over a stool and lash you in the back , on you buttock . INT : on you bare buttock .", "there be nobody to touch sexually to begin with , but those year , they be animal . they do not care who they touch , they really do not . they touch I to see it my body 's naked , you know , just whatever I have on I to cover I up . they take off whatever they have on they back and they cover I , which be the truth . and I be -- they be watch I , also , same story .", "a : he be move very fast , and we be terribly important in the fact that he be able to move so fast because a c-47 carry paratrooper into area of drop . then , on the way back , they -- they come back and pick up the glider and they throw it -- fly they in . then they come back and they fly into -- like I take a mission into -- on D-Day plus six , we fly into Omaha Beach , and we fly into a -- a -- a landing strip that have be cut hastily in the bluff above Omaha Beach . and we land there with flight nurse aboard , and pick up the terribly wound -- most terribly wound of Omaha Beach , and we just have a constant stream of airplane fly in and out , and bring those people back to hospital in England . and while I be there , I step out of the airplane , try to help with the loading of the -- of the litter patient and so forth .", "and those nurse come up and say , `` oh , my God ! would you all get back in you place ? '' -lrb- laugh -rrb- you know , people be run around like that ; and ... and nobody even notice that people be naked , you know . they be so overcome , look for relative , and ... and something from home that just ... the scene like that , they will stay with you the rest of you life . Q : you tell I before the interview that you be in Landsberg , the dp camp in Landsberg .", "or if you change from one camp to another , you come into the bath house again . they re-shave you head , disinfect you and you clothing . I remember just before we leave Auschwitz we stand out there naked , wait for we clothes to be finish so we can get on we death march . but just , as I say before , just every corner here , -lsb- sigh -rsb- you can sense -- you can sense death . you can sense destruction , evil -- just a evil place .", "he say , it seem that Lord Jollit -lrb- ph -rrb- , who be the chancellor of -- lord chancellor of England and keeper of the privy seal be here in Berlin , and he have express a desire to go down to Nuremberg and see the top nazi prisoner that you have down there . he say , now it so happen that he be travel in the plane that President Roosevelt give to Churchill , you know , the -- in the last election , the government change . so then he plane be at the british air strip in the british zone here in Berlin and if you report over there at 10 o'clock and take he -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- and take he down to Nuremberg and let he see the prisoner and entertain he on behalf of the -- the american army , I will greatly appreciate it . which of course that be just he very gentle , nice way of give I a order . and then he -- oh he -- first he ask I if I care to -- to smoke , a cigarette or a pipe or a cigar .", "I pay -- and he pay for I a t-ticket , and I come on the plane from Berlin , and I remember they call I in . `` you be a smuggler . '' I have to undress , and they -- the British , that be what it -- the british part of Berlin . and they check I , they look for I . and at that time I figure , hey , I should have have like -- like with the german maybe , to put something on my leg -- on my -- in my -- so that they will not touch -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- .", "we use to get enough ammunition of theirs , but that be hard . now , after the first battle line be over , we command order we to go back to position , only change position because we expect that this will not be the last battle . so all of these kill , include the Zundenfeur -lrb- ph -rrb- , the officer , we command order to go ahead , to strip they uniform off of they and just naked and cover with a blanket , put they back on a horse and wagon and we take one of the farmer , send they to the city to turn in they corpse and give they a note , `` do not fight we , because that be the way you be go to see the rest of you come back . '' it be true enough that we be there and the follow day the commander decide that we should be on guard again because they probably will send in a second force . and they do ."], "topic_words": [9, "0.242*\"back\" + 0.037*\"turn\" + 0.037*\"push\" + 0.028*\"death\" + 0.024*\"force\" + 0.023*\"realize\" + 0.017*\"world\" + 0.016*\"Americans\" + 0.016*\"word\" + 0.016*\"nurse\""]}, {"texts": ["that mean you sit on a bench and in front of you be like a head with a vice , with a wooden vice , and you put the leather into -- the two piece of leather into the wooden vice , you have a awl to punch the whole , and then you have a long string with two needle , one right , one leave -- and you sew a double stitch like this , and it be piecework . I mean , they count it , and once in a while , there be ten strip to a unit . once in awhile , we be a strip short , and then you have to go to the foreman , who be a young man we age and you have to do a lot of explain and a lot of excuse , and then you would get another strip , but they be count out carefully because the Germans have ship they carefully . the reason my strip disappear be I steal they . I steal six strip because my shoe have no sole , and I put they in the top of my boot , and I walk through the inspection ; it be like at the airport .", "a : yes , it be sew the metal frame that go around a shovel that a soldier carry on he belt to dig a trench , and those be sew on a goat or a causa -lrb- ph -rrb- , as you say in a yiddish . that mean you sit on a bench and in front of you be like a head with a vice , with a wooden vice , and you put the leather into -- the two piece of leather into the wooden vice , you have a awl to punch the whole , and then you have a long string with two needle , one right , one leave -- and you sew a double stitch like this , and it be piecework . I mean , they count it , and once in a while , there be ten strip to a unit . once in awhile , we be a strip short , and then you have to go to the foreman , who be a young man we age and you have to do a lot of explain and a lot of excuse , and then you would get another strip , but they be count out carefully because the Germans have ship they carefully . the reason my strip disappear be I steal they .", "I mean , they count it , and once in a while , there be ten strip to a unit . once in awhile , we be a strip short , and then you have to go to the foreman , who be a young man we age and you have to do a lot of explain and a lot of excuse , and then you would get another strip , but they be count out carefully because the Germans have ship they carefully . the reason my strip disappear be I steal they . I steal six strip because my shoe have no sole , and I put they in the top of my boot , and I walk through the inspection ; it be like at the airport . they would tap you from neck to the bottom .", "once in awhile , we be a strip short , and then you have to go to the foreman , who be a young man we age and you have to do a lot of explain and a lot of excuse , and then you would get another strip , but they be count out carefully because the Germans have ship they carefully . the reason my strip disappear be I steal they . I steal six strip because my shoe have no sole , and I put they in the top of my boot , and I walk through the inspection ; it be like at the airport . they would tap you from neck to the bottom . occasionally you have to undress , and I only tell about it after I have all six out .", "I use to spend a lot of time at Fort Meade . Q : okay . a : and we use to go to Baltimore , because we have a bunch of young guy , they never have be at strip club on the East Baltimore Street , they have a lot of they . I guess that be pretty well know , that East Baltimore Street . and I -- if I want to get all my tu -- all my guy together , the best place to find they be at East Baltimore Street .", "and he have sort of a drill material pair of trousers with elastic in the waist . and underneath that I have a culotte . and the culotte be stitch in the center , double that there be a little hole , a strip go up to my waist . and we stuff the Napoleon in there . and Napoleon be like we , 6 -- 5 cent now .", "I steal six strip because my shoe have no sole , and I put they in the top of my boot , and I walk through the inspection ; it be like at the airport . they would tap you from neck to the bottom . occasionally you have to undress , and I only tell about it after I have all six out . nobody know , and people think I must have lose my mind , but I have no sole for the winter . Q : and , then you get somebody to fix they .", "and not until this morning , I do not pay attention , this be April the 13th , 1943 from Spaichingen , I be ship to Dachau . and at Dachau , I be put in in a barrack . there be hundred naked people in this one -- a lot of Russians , a lot of Russians prisoner -- a lot of russian prisoner of war . the lice be eat we up alive . it be like everything be move and everybody be cover with lice .", "a : it be a chewing tobacco factory . Q : and what be you duty ? a : well , when you chew -- when you make chew tobacco there be this -- take two people , one if -- one that lay , dry strip of tobacco leave , they kind of small one . and then after they go the fellow who put -- I do not know what it be , but they put -- they cut up the tobacco , put it in some kind of prune juice to make it sweet , and then you go and you -- a-and you put that stuff on top -- no , behind he and he go and he take a piece of this horrible chewing stuff and put it on the leaf , and he roll it into it , and it come like a little sausage , continuous sausage and he just roll it in . he get to the end of it and he put it on some kind of wheel and the thing start anew .", "he take that away . a lot of stuff get steal , you know , by the way . some camera and valuable thing be steal , especially of those people who leave completely naked , because they leave everything behind . it be all gather up by some -- some Arab prisoner whom the British have assemble for this purpose . all the stuff be gather up in just heap and send off to -- to the ship .", "and the one selection day , I be rotten from the waist down , infection , boil . the combination of poor diet , poor hygiene , what have you , just develop in boil . I be not go to undress . if I do , it be a death warrant . I decide I be go to undress on top but not at the bottom .", "and then she add to that , I bring it from the ghetto . of course this , -lsb- laugh -rsb- this be a kind of excitement because I know the procedure by this time , that you could not take anything into , in-into a concentration camp . -lsb- cough -rsb- people be strip of any possession they have and there be no way of carry a prayer book into a camp and uh hold onto it , and I of course ask , how do you do it , and she tell I that when they give she she first working transcript : not spell check or verify for accuracy . Wentworth film liberation/dp 2/10/95 RABBI ABRAHAM KLAUSNER Page 7 allocation of bread , they give she a heel of a loaf , and she cut or tear a slice but not completely , make a hinge of it . and then dig out the crumb in the heel of a loaf of the bread , and put she little prayer book and carry the bread with she and of course bread be something you be not go to , you be not go to steal one from the other , and so forth .", "you could not have a pimple on you body and here they give you for six month not to get you period and we break out in all kind of boil and as a matter of fact , , I do have a boil on my belly but the ss man do not see I , he must have be distract so he do not see the boil , he just point I to go ahead . but we all have something from that -- it be not normal and that be the last I see Rochela . so they choose you naked -- you could not be too skinny , you could not be too fat . you could not have a boil , you could not ... ... can you imagine ? Q : you could not be sick ?", "they be relation , or they be cousin -- I do not enquiry . we be absolutely shock . and they -- I be naked , practically . so -- but they have double -- double sock , and double panties , and double scarf . and -- and so they dress I up , as best as they could .", "not very much pay , and I -- my mother-in-law get I a job with a designer , Suzy . Suzy with a designer , design sweater , and skirt with feel appliqu\u00e9ds , it be very much in fashion . sell it to Saks , and everything -- and we have a store on the strip . and where we live be , we live near the strip . it be between the strip and Santa Monica , and at that time the strip be the place ."], "topic_words": [10, "0.112*\"strip\" + 0.079*\"put\" + 0.062*\"lot\" + 0.056*\"piece\" + 0.039*\"bread\" + 0.029*\"stuff\" + 0.025*\"reason\" + 0.025*\"ship\" + 0.025*\"steal\" + 0.023*\"count\""]}, {"texts": ["MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN No to Kobe to Kobe excuse I . to Kobe . MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN only remember very 10 distinctly just talk from the personnel in the train 11 when the train leave -- or when we leave the train the moment 12 all the russian attendant or personnel they strip down 13 they uniform and we see that in reality they be all 14 russian soldier and not just train personnel . this 15 remeijer very very distinctly . 16 so on the 27th of September shortly after 17 six oclobk we arrive in Kobe Japan .", "not predominantly , but there be , eventually wind up to be two , two , forty and eight freight car full of woman . so , we get on what be the last train , the last convoy of prisoner that get out of Paris . and we be five day on that train , part of which we car be naked . and we , and that be , that be another scene that be humorous , because it be a little tragic . ninety-two man in one forty and eight , all naked , with nothing but can of sardine and the equivalent of a large pretzel can as a toilet .", "and we be five day on that train , part of which we car be naked . and we , and that be , that be another scene that be humorous , because it be a little tragic . ninety-two man in one forty and eight , all naked , with nothing but can of sardine and the equivalent of a large pretzel can as a toilet . and we be naked because we manage to get six prisoner out of we car , escape . whatever have become of they , I do not know , but we do get six out .", "the next day they be carry out in one coffin ... one coffin , and there be a a team -lrb- ph -rrb- which do not do anything else but the whole day they they they carry the dead people out and uh and as I say , by November I guess one third of the people have die , and new people come in . uh at this time , before this happen , I be once order to go by truck to the station ... now I do not know whether whether Lauerhutte have a station or whether it be , to a station and I be sit with another buddy , with another inmate , next to the driver and in the back there be perhaps thirty or forty uh concentration camp inmate uh who have be all sick . they come from the sick bay , and when we come to the station , they have to undress naked and be push into a freight car and the reason why I and my buddy have to come along because we have to take they clothes and bring it back and they probably go to to Auschwitz to the gas , you know . we be in AuscHwitz and they go to the gas chamber . I do not know at what time we start to realize that there be gas chamber , but we do not understand this ... we identify gas chamber with crematoria and I think since we be people from ... come from the west , the knowledge of what really happen be give to we by Jews from Poland and from the I remember there be a group of Jews from , and they know what happen , but they could not explain it either .", "that be strictly extermination , one of the first one , which , as far as I remember , be initiate in December of 1941 -- very , very primitive . they start with this thing here until they develop those big camp like Auschwitz and the other one . and the way we , we be tell be that there be -- people be bring there by bus , and that they be park overnight in a church and strip of they clothing and load into a special bus , which 50 or 75 people be able to get in there , and the gas be release in a short time , which take about 15 minute . it be something like 15 kilometer , something like that , to that forest . and by the time that bus reach the station there , the people be dead .", "and we , and that be , that be another scene that be humorous , because it be a little tragic . ninety-two man in one forty and eight , all naked , with nothing but can of sardine and the equivalent of a large pretzel can as a toilet . and we be naked because we manage to get six prisoner out of we car , escape . whatever have become of they , I do not know , but we do get six out . a patch in the floor , of the car .", "Q : and be it very hot ? a : it be extremely hot , and we -- we -- when we arrive by train in Baushowiczy , which be Bauschowitz , because there be no train station , no rail to Terez\u00edn , they be only build later for the sole purpose of transport jew from Terez\u00edn to the east . but we arrive in Bauschowitz , and there be truck there with Czechs who have be in Terez\u00edn since ' 41 , and some of they have strip uniform on , which also be not continue , you know , after more and more transport arrive , they do not give uniform to inmate any more . and they have to -- they work for the Nazis to -- to take all the luggage out of the luggage car , and put they on truck . and of course , they be then transport back to Germany .", "it be small , they , after the transporter come they pick out about 50-60 people , and they take care later for clean up , as I say , after the transport , and , and then they shoot these people . but somehow for , it look for they not efficient enough , so they pick out people , so when I come in camp , there be there maybe 100 people work there . uh , so and , and they work be we clean up just the mess after the people , do separate the clothes from the train , cleaning , thing like that , so as I say , we have uh the , the , the job be , I have the separate the clothes of sort the clothes , but not always because if it come some special thing , what they find some special job , they pick you just , and they let you do , so I be once , they pick I to , they cut the hair of the woman , and that be in we barrack about , about 10 mo-10 feet-from , of I , ten foot from uh , yard , ten yard , about from the gas chamber , and they take we about 20 , 20 people go to this barrack , and we have to cut , randomly cut the long hair from the woman , the people , when the woman come in there naked with child and thing like that , be terrible view , terrible view . some people , the polish people they know what be go on , but we have also people from Holland and other country , what they be not aware really , they still believe that they still , nothing go to happen , and they ask we question , but the Germans be around in a room like here , and they could not , they could not , we could not talk with they , we could not say anything because if we would open we mouth , we would go with they together , so we do not do , so sometimes I be catch , they call I for this kind of work , what we do , it be a horrible thing . now , as I say , we have , uh , uh , permanent job , a permanent job , mostly be the kind of work , but when the transport , when no , no transport , they usually take we for work uh , to dig or to the wood .", "they be put in freight train , and each of these freight `` wagon '' be completely close , and they pack the people in to the point that it be usually could be twenty people , let 's say twenty soldier , would be in , but this time they put hundred people , old , young , without any water , and they lock it and the train eventually go to somewhere . when this be describe , the circumstance , it become very obvious to I and to all of we that the future of those people be very gloomy , and this be something much more serious than a matter of take away this , or take away that , from certain people . it be a matter of life-threatening situation , and they , of course , be completely strip of they whole property . from there on , then , I have personally no , whatsoever , expectation from the Germans except to be kill . Q : then until 1944 , until the german invasion , you have mobilization , there be a hungarian army , that be fight ...", "this type , these be the work shoe , and only the privileged , studen aldeste or kapo , block aldeste they be allow because they be the privileged type of people . they be allow , they get special permission from the ss to wear good shoe . they have a better type of a suit strip yes , but high class , they have they make by tailor from we own people who have be tailor , they get custom make while everyone else have to take what be give to they while walk through these section where they be assign , these privileged people include these I mention take off these shoe and give these people the normal type of shoe assign . Q : be there ever a chance , how do one become a block aldeste or a kapo or ... . .", "we have wooden shoe and we march make a tremendous clatter on the street . it be early in the morning and as we be be march people be , who be go to work , civilian , be stop . the trolley car be stop and people be stop to let we pass , a column of a few hundred people in strip uniform . -lrb- cry -rrb- and the people cry . -lrb- cry -rrb- for the first time I see support .", "so the Germans know that there would be no train go , and so they do in three day empty practically all of , say that again , Westerberg , gee , I have a block . the um , in three day , there be only about 400 people leave from the thousand and thousand , so we be in the first train , which go as we find out , not when we come there , but maybe a day or two later that we be in Auschwitz . so the train where the regular , as I understand , the regular camp car , there be no seating in there , nothing , it be naked . and the only thing be the little um , a little thing like this for maybe 175 people to use . and uh , otherwise people , a tremendous amount of , of , of luggage .", "the Germans then stick we in cattle truck , forty in a truck , and take I then I be in the truck for two day , no food , and we all have the run , just imagine how humiliating it be in those truck with no toilet nothing and we use one of the corner as a toilet . we go to , I think Stalag IVB at Moosburg , I think it be , and there they get we out they give we some food and by this time , do not forget , we be cover in lice . so they take all of we uniform and put it in whatever it do , clean they up and give it to we back whilst we be naked they take we through a place where they have like sheep shearer and they take all we hair off , everywhere , up , down below , up on the top , everywhere , and then they dab we with what I call be a bucket of creosote , and disinfectant anyway they put we back on the train now and we be on the train again for about another two day and eventually pull up in a station call Lansdorf , Poland . err , it be Stalag V111B -lsb- dl -rsb- and when , when do you arrive at Stalag VIIIB ?", "people who -- who be very private and very -- very introverted , they -- they have to go -- they have to -- they go to the toilet among 75 other people . I mean -- I mean , I do not think there be any need to describe the -- the -- the feeling of people , of -- or how they must have feel -- how -- how a person , a grandmother must have feel when -- when -- when the daughter or the grandchild have to help she with -- with she everyday business , which she would not have dream of even talk about , never mind do it in public . or -- so I think the last bit of -- of dignity be just -- be just strip away . INT : how do the people cope with the body ? do -- what happen when the train stop ?", "it be one of the case that I do . and then we stop they from go any further and the state agree that they should not do that . so I do not know , I be just think back on Elsie Dale and the people you get to meet in these case , who have to be pretty gutsy to stand up against pretty moneyed interest , who pay big buck for lawyer and who hire people in the community , who hire they ... I think one of these folk have a son who be a truck driver for the same company that have mine , that be mine that strip mine . you be always run into that , that sort of situation . but in every one of these case , you know , whether it be in legal service or it be the discrimination case like Fannie Lou Hamer , and the people who ... Eulah Hall always remind I of , you mention Eulah Hall ."], "topic_words": [11, "0.505*\"people\" + 0.086*\"train\" + 0.043*\"transport\" + 0.036*\"car\" + 0.028*\"stop\" + 0.025*\"station\" + 0.016*\"cattle\" + 0.014*\"toilet\" + 0.012*\"Treblinka\" + 0.010*\"luggage\""]}, {"texts": ["and we -- and , of course , the road go through . and one kibbutz , Negba , be close by actually guard this narrow point . but we know if this point be break , if this strip be break , the whole southern part of Palestine , the whole Negev , will be isolate . strategically , if you look at the old map , it be a nightmare . nobody could -- nobody with -- with the right mind would believe a country can be hold where a strip of land by Jerusalem be only 25 kilometer wide .", "First of all , it be break up stone with a big sledge hammer into small piece . once they be break up , you have to load up truck with they very fast . and the truck be drive to the air strip . and after the truck we walk toward the air strip and distribute the break up little stone , gravel stone , nice evenly over the whole area , as much as be necessary , as a lot . and then we wait , wait for the cement truck to come .", "once they be break up , you have to load up truck with they very fast . and the truck be drive to the air strip . and after the truck we walk toward the air strip and distribute the break up little stone , gravel stone , nice evenly over the whole area , as much as be necessary , as a lot . and then we wait , wait for the cement truck to come . and we have to go in with the foot to the cement and be give big broom to push the cement , even out .", "and the land be all together in the same area . the poorer people have a strip of land to one corner of the town and a strip of land in another . otherwise , if you have money , a few zloty , you buy a strip of land , and that be how . and also , each area be know of grow a certain -- let 's say , one area be -- they grow potato there . the potato be grow there .", "they own the land around the house . and the land be all together in the same area . the poorer people have a strip of land to one corner of the town and a strip of land in another . otherwise , if you have money , a few zloty , you buy a strip of land , and that be how . and also , each area be know of grow a certain -- let 's say , one area be -- they grow potato there .", "but we know if this point be break , if this strip be break , the whole southern part of Palestine , the whole Negev , will be isolate . strategically , if you look at the old map , it be a nightmare . nobody could -- nobody with -- with the right mind would believe a country can be hold where a strip of land by Jerusalem be only 25 kilometer wide . 40 million Arab -- Arabs be against 800,000 -- -lsb- background noise -rsb- INT : you stay there .", "and unfortunately , at the same time , the Arab fighting start . and the corridor between the northern part of Palestine and the southern part of Palestine be very , very narrow . there be only a strip of land , perhaps 4 kilometer wide , in jewish hand between the northern and the southern part . and we -- and , of course , the road go through . and one kibbutz , Negba , be close by actually guard this narrow point .", "and also , each area be know of grow a certain -- let 's say , one area be -- they grow potato there . the potato be grow there . another corner of the -- of the town , a strip of land , the wheat be grow better . do you understand ? INT : so you father have this also , that he have to go from one end to the other ?", "somehow we get a bottle of vodka , and we wave the vodka in front of a trunk , and the guy stop . my mother , my sister , Gert , my wife , and I and two friend , we go on this truck and he take we to go south . and all of a sudden , in the middle of the wood , he stop , ask we to go down to the wood , undress completely . he take all we miserable rag , include the shoe and leave with the russian truck . so we come south to a town soroca -lsb- also spell Soroki -rsb- , which be on the Dniester River , and we come to the Dniester River .", "fk : I do not think it hap -- you know the Roer River be on the , Roer River be on the french side of the Rhine . PS : yeah . fk : it be a small , narrow strip of land as you be look at a map . it could have be in there , but it could have be after the Rhine too . I know we have break out and be go hell for -lsb- unclear -rsb- to get further up toward Berlin .", "I take a train to Buchach . it be a scenically nice little town . there be a river strip , a contribute -- a tributary to the river -- the Vistula , which go to the Baltic Sea . very scenically . Hilly on both side .", "INT : Mrs. Lyon , please continue . GL : we be in this brick factory for four week . and during that time , we have to sleep in little slat -- be under a , under a , under long strip of -- they be not room , they be not house , they be , they be use to dry out the brick . and so there be brick for wall , not necessarily all the way to the , to the top , to the roof . it just have roof , a roof , and it have beam here and there .", "and we be tell we can not go forwards , and nobody from the back can come to we because the road be unsafe . and we be there probably a week or more , surround by the Germans until they sort of like thin out . some of they maybe go to they own home or they undress . but until the road get safe and , and we continue until we come -- already in April , we come to a town which be call Biesenthal . and in my opinion , it be south of Berlin , perhaps 35 , 40 kilometer south of Berlin .", "we drive to bingen through the Rhine Gorge . it be a gorge and that be what you call it in this country ; over there it be a `` valley . '' it be a fairly narrow strip which contain the Rhine river , which be by that time more than halfway down to the sea . the river be constrain to be only 90 foot wide so it flow rather rapidly . it be the area of the `` Mauseturm '' -lrb- the tower on a island where , the legend have it , mouse go to devour a wicked Bishop who have take refuge there from he flock -rrb- , the Niebelungen rock and the legend of the `` Lorelei '' -lrb- the maiden who sit on top of a rock and enchant the boatmen to forget about the rock and so he do drown in the river -rrb- .", "a : yes , yes , he be aware of that , because as a matter of fact I be friendly with he . he be always a cook , and he always cook . so after when we would send food from one camp to another camp , I be maybe in 15 of they , but I do not know the location because they use to send boy to build air strip . it mean take big stone , break they up , make gravel , and then cover with cement . and every camp have a little kitchen ."], "topic_words": [12, "0.133*\"strip\" + 0.081*\"truck\" + 0.064*\"area\" + 0.037*\"town\" + 0.033*\"land\" + 0.028*\"break\" + 0.025*\"road\" + 0.024*\"build\" + 0.024*\"load\" + 0.023*\"fire\""]}, {"texts": ["why not ? '' so I start run , kind of over the hill -- I run over the hill and there be lot of firing and go and then I see -- all of a sudden , I be kind of run on the border of a hi -- of a -- of a field . the border be kind of a strip of grass , it be higher than a field and I see right by my foot there , dust fly . and I do not think -- think much of it , but it be somebody shooting machine gun from a way , way distance there -- german machine gun and hit right where I be run , below my foot . it be several time , right below my foot .", "you know , they form -- each block be put together , and we have to march around the place . there be a -- you know the tower be there where the guard be arm with machine gun ? and there be a green grass , a strip of grass , between the walk and the barb wire fence . if you step -- you be tell , do not step on that grass . if you step on that grass , they shoot you from up there .", "I do not remember . anyhow , when we be there , a plane come by and it be a little wood , not much . it be a big field and a , a field -lsb- unclear -rsb- set in a strip of wood . that be where we be there . a plane pass by and all of a sudden drop spray with , I do not know if it be bomb or a machine gun .", "and , of course , the answer to that would have be a huge whack on the head or whatever . so we have to strip . so we strip . now , I be unfortunate enough to be immediately sexually assault . when I say sexually assault , do not think that that mean a actual sexual intercourse , because no .", "take , for instance , Demjanjuk . you know the story about Demjanjuk , that he be a guard in tr -- in Belzyce , he be the man who operate -- and in Treblinka , who operate the gas chamber th-there . now , Demjanjuk , he biggest pleasure be when they bring in the Jews , and they be naked , and they walk through the maze , to go in in the dead can -- t-to the gas chamber , to the -- to the room . Demjanjuk and other like he , be stand there laugh , and everyone -- every time when they see a young girl , with the firm breast , yeah , they go and cut off the breast , or stab there . Al -- it be a -- it be a joke .", "I mean he be just a bad person . anyway , there be a bunch of Russians who hate he , because he especially hate Russians , I do not know why , because he be a spanish communist and the Russians be russian Communists , but he hate they . so they nail he -- they strip he , they nail he to the barrack by hand and foot and they take a heavy machine gun and they shoot he to piece . and I watch -- when I be in the hospital I watch out of my window -- be -- my bunk be next to the window , I watch it . and I ask , `` who that be ? ''", "I like to say to the people who make that kind of a statement , that Jews go to the slaughterhouse like sheep . how do you fight machine gun and submachine gun with you bare hand ? I would like , I would like they to tell I how this can be when you be surround by hundred of storm trooper with heavy weapon , and you stand there naked . men , woman and child in the yard . how do you expect to fight back ?", "if none of we ... if some of we might be pregnant . if they see anybody pregnant , they pull they out . so you know , it be ... so we be stand there naked ; and they come and they look at we breast and we belly . then we go to a room where they shave we . and I remember see sit there one of the people I know with long hair and at that point half of she hair be shaven and half be still long .", "ukrainian people be stand and look from nearby , and grab the clothing , whatever they could , from the Jews . down in the grave be one ss man sit with a machine gun . they have to undress themselves and walk down step . when they walk down the step , he be go through with a machine gun and kill they . INT : how do you find that out ?", "tell the soldier who be stand outside with a gun on he shoulder . tell he that I examine you . afterwards , all the woman be send out to the field , strip half naked , thousand of they . and the soldier be lift up the breast one by one , all the woman , to search for diamond under they breast . maybe they paste a diamond there .", "this be the last communication . and I now know that he be one victim of a mass execution . that be , at that time , the method of extermination , when they have to dig they own grave and strip and be mow down with machine gun . INT : and so it be -- be it around this time that you be deport or at least move ? en : around -- no , I be deport on April 1st , ' 42 .", "it be like little red spot mainly around my side , on my side of my stomach , and I just happen to have a couple when we be last check out . Mengele check we out before we leave . naked , of course . everybody . and my cousin tell I to tell he if he stop I that I do get these every time I eat -- we be give some kind of a cheese sometime -- some kind of a very sharp cheese -- and to tell he that I get it from cheese , which be not true , because it have no connection .", "a big picture window face the platform of the rail station , otwock . I wake up to the tune of a whistle and machine gun firing . as I look out the window , I see on the platform there be spotlight shine to a bunch of man , and woman , child naked . and as soon as the whistle blow , the machine gun gun they down and the people would fall on top of each other . in back of I in the station , polish black marketeer look out the window like watch a tv movie .", "but there be people ! and , of course , the answer to that would have be a huge whack on the head or whatever . so we have to strip . so we strip . now , I be unfortunate enough to be immediately sexually assault .", "so , the clothes , everything be take away from we . we be take into a big hall , and uh , and the row kind of move on completely naked . and this be actually the first time that I have see my mother completely naked . and all the other woman . I , I , I have never see it , and , and , they be just stand there and kind of hold they hand together , and the Germans walk back and forth with they little um , whatever you call it that they be hit with , a leather strip ."], "topic_words": [13, "0.127*\"kind\" + 0.066*\"strip\" + 0.057*\"gun\" + 0.050*\"machine\" + 0.046*\"call\" + 0.045*\"foot\" + 0.039*\"move\" + 0.039*\"row\" + 0.036*\"half\" + 0.034*\"watch\""]}, {"texts": ["many many year ago of course ... pardon I ... I get a job in the beginning . first I work in a motel on Sunset Strip for a while and then uh my brother have a good friend here and he have a shop with optical instrument and I get a job there and I work there for a few year work for he and settle down and my wife then have a job also . she work uh on the Sunset Strip also in a knit shop . she be uh handwork ... she inherit from she ... she father be a great tailor and Marsha inherit that obviously from she dad and she be great with she hand . she be uh ... those time , those day I mean they be embroider sweater , you know , in mode and then she be work for this girl Suzie , name Suzie , on the Strip .", "it be beautiful . many many year ago of course ... pardon I ... I get a job in the beginning . first I work in a motel on Sunset Strip for a while and then uh my brother have a good friend here and he have a shop with optical instrument and I get a job there and I work there for a few year work for he and settle down and my wife then have a job also . she work uh on the Sunset Strip also in a knit shop . she be uh handwork ... she inherit from she ... she father be a great tailor and Marsha inherit that obviously from she dad and she be great with she hand .", "she work uh on the Sunset Strip also in a knit shop . she be uh handwork ... she inherit from she ... she father be a great tailor and Marsha inherit that obviously from she dad and she be great with she hand . she be uh ... those time , those day I mean they be embroider sweater , you know , in mode and then she be work for this girl Suzie , name Suzie , on the Strip . she have a famous shop and she work for they . she meet a lot of movie star there too .", "and so we we be march under guard every day to that to that factory , about uh five mile or maybe five kilometer from the ghetto in separate group and we work . the work be hard and miserable but we work and we come back and we meet at night in the ghetto and uh hope to hear something from we parent because we believe , or at least I believe ... I have no reason not to ... that they be someplace in the Ukraine . and of course that be ... there be no suspense then and of course they all go to a destruction camp and all the people be drive naked into gas chamber and kill . after about three week of work in that factory , one day ... and we group be maybe a group of hundred people ... after about three week of work and the march every day to that factory , one day when the work , when the job be over , the official in that factory say to we you be not go back . we have build a camp uh within the factory , right outside the factory wall but kind of adjoining the factory and you be stay here tonight .", "it be a bachelor . so it be one bedroom , and so-called lunchroom together divide with the kitchen . the kitchen be just a strip . and he be work in different factor -- factory until he reach -- go to -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . and he do night shift as well as day shift many a time , so we hardly meet because I be work in a dress factory , finish .", "the Nazis try to stop -- they try to interfere and cause static so they make we weave . we be tell that what it be -- I be not a hundred percent sure . they make we weave plastic -- braid plastic strip and they be go to drop this , hope that that would interfere with the radar transmission . they be drop this from plane and we be force to keep plait these thing in the Weberei . this be one of the job in the Weberei and we work there for a while .", "the last one be Fisher , who die uh last year . and without a partner you could not survive . after we finish a day 's work at Canada Kommando , you just could not go home , back to the camp , without be search , first at the work site - line up , strip naked in most case . and if you be not strip naked , you pants drop because they know that some of we carry money in the place that be , uh , kind of dark . uh , but we do , we also know how to smuggle out , smuggle the stuff in .", "and without a partner you could not survive . after we finish a day 's work at Canada Kommando , you just could not go home , back to the camp , without be search , first at the work site - line up , strip naked in most case . and if you be not strip naked , you pants drop because they know that some of we carry money in the place that be , uh , kind of dark . uh , but we do , we also know how to smuggle out , smuggle the stuff in . for instance , you in this row , and you friend be in the row in front of you .", "people only work -- the one that work be either in the kitchen , and I be not lucky enough , you know , to be -- to be choose to work in the kitchen , or they work by -- which -- they -- that be call Canada , where they sort out the clothes and all the stuff that be bring in by the -- by the people that arrive on the train , because everybody come with a suitcase of something . an-and some people have valuable still , I mean hidden , like I -- we have hide in one bar of soap , large diamond earring . but we throw away the bar of soap , because when -- when we arrive and they take we to the shower , you know , to be shower and we have to un-undress completely naked and they shave we all over and -- and they say , if every -- you can not have nothing with you -- you have to walk in just completely naked and you will not get back you clothes anyway , so I be afraid to have that cake of soap , so I throw away the soap right there and -- and I -- and I have nothing . but eventually , no they -- they take all these thing and they be look for , you know , for -- for valuable and people have sew in and some have in clothes , sewn in something , you know . so they have people work sort out and -- and finding and also take away the clothes , which be eventually ship to Germany .", "the gate say like all camp , Arbeit Macht Frei which mean work make free . in the camp , I keep ask as we walk through the slau ______ -- . you be take to a place where you be search and strip which be call slau _______ , mean like a sluice . there be people work who be already in Terezin and I keep ask they if they know my brother . he be still there and then maybe a day or two later , I really do not remember , it take a day or two to locate he and see he .", "but in he camp , in the man 's camp . but we be mostly do make work , you know ? they have -- they cut strip of fabric . and be weave those rag that you -- they still do . and -- and of course , they have to work in the kitchen .", "there I get a assignment to do the braiding . but I could not go to the factory . so they would go to the factory , bring roll of long strip of fabric . and I would braid it lay in a bed . and they would bring it back to the factory .", "the Germans have different place to work . the ss handle carpentry and electricity . they use to have they jew go to the home of deportee and completely strip the place and send the item home to Germany . my parent be live -- you have to live where you work -- in a tailor shop where they repair uniform 25 . be there medical care ?", "he go right into -- into selection . and Mariani and I be in the block together for maybe four week or so , four or five week , and then I work that we -- I be send to work in -- they tor -- I still do not know what they do with it . you tor -- you tear the clothing into strip , braid they , and that be it . whatever they do with it , whatever they use it for , I never find out . and then I work -- I build a road to the east , we be transport rock and break the rock , and there we have a guard who would let we sit in the outhouse by the tower to take a re -- it be brutally hot , even in -- in September .", "and he be a attorney in Munkacz and be a very nice person . and again that be fortunate for I that I meet he and that he be that nice . and after sort and be check by a ss doctor , again undressed naked and a floodlight on you to see what shape you be in and he pick out I do not know how many of we and we get assign to one barracks . we find out when we be there that we be work in tunnel on a rotate shift and eight hour shift and we shift happen to start on Sunday night at 11 . so it would be from 11 until 7 in the morning work in the tunnel ."], "topic_words": [14, "0.259*\"work\" + 0.094*\"day\" + 0.053*\"week\" + 0.048*\"good\" + 0.045*\"couple\" + 0.043*\"factory\" + 0.028*\"job\" + 0.019*\"hard\" + 0.019*\"kitchen\" + 0.017*\"meet\""]}, {"texts": ["what do you mean by that ? `` seleczia '' mean a selection of people , they have we all undress and Mengele , you hear about Mengele , the one that be be film now , would you believe that he clap I like this on my back , that bastard . one day , they assemble we all , naked , and Hela , Rusha 's sister , have two other girl at the Plaszow camp , we keep together , Manya and I , and we always try to keep Manya between Hela and I , Rusha 's sister and I , because Manya have scar , from operation , and if he see a scar , or a pimple on somebody , and you do not look good anymore , you go here ; you do not know where you be go , but we assume . so we try to keep Manya between we , but he say `` March , march '' , so when I come by he say to I `` die vet noch gut arbeit leissen '' that I will produce a lot of work yet , so we all go by and we be lucky , we could go and get dress again . but then , this , be this in April 1944 ?", "just from day to day , from hour to hour , believe I , you never know , and then they , one day , and then , almost every week , 2-3 time a week they make `` selectzia '' . what do you mean by that ? `` seleczia '' mean a selection of people , they have we all undress and Mengele , you hear about Mengele , the one that be be film now , would you believe that he clap I like this on my back , that bastard . one day , they assemble we all , naked , and Hela , Rusha 's sister , have two other girl at the Plaszow camp , we keep together , Manya and I , and we always try to keep Manya between Hela and I , Rusha 's sister and I , because Manya have scar , from operation , and if he see a scar , or a pimple on somebody , and you do not look good anymore , you go here ; you do not know where you be go , but we assume . so we try to keep Manya between we , but he say `` March , march '' , so when I come by he say to I `` die vet noch gut arbeit leissen '' that I will produce a lot of work yet , so we all go by and we be lucky , we could go and get dress again .", "near I be stand a beautiful young woman , she be much older than I but she be a real beauty with blue eye and blond hair and despite that she come from the ghetto , somehow she be outstanding . and they be beat she for no reason . you know when you stand there , you be not a person , you do not have a name , you just have a number and then they tell we to line up and to disrobe and naked we be take to a very big place . the only thing remarkable about this very big place , it be that it have like showerhead on top and since we hear about gassing , I and my sister and my aunt , we be prepare that they take we to a gas chamber . so I be stand all naked by this little shower head and I be , we be say goodby and I be beg God for one thing ... I should be the first one should fall because I could not see with my aunt and my sister , ___________ , so I be there really pray the first time in my life with the way I could and I say , `` Momma , help I , I want to be the first one . ''", "you know when you stand there , you be not a person , you do not have a name , you just have a number and then they tell we to line up and to disrobe and naked we be take to a very big place . the only thing remarkable about this very big place , it be that it have like showerhead on top and since we hear about gassing , I and my sister and my aunt , we be prepare that they take we to a gas chamber . so I be stand all naked by this little shower head and I be , we be say goodby and I be beg God for one thing ... I should be the first one should fall because I could not see with my aunt and my sister , ___________ , so I be there really pray the first time in my life with the way I could and I say , `` Momma , help I , I want to be the first one . '' for a eternity , they close the door , for a eternity ; we think ... some people become hysterical , mother be kiss they daughter , they be say goodby , people be faint ; then all of a sudden , water start to come out , it be not gas , they put we to wash up and clothes and it be like water of life ! we be drink , we be wash .", "it be like on a little hill and the soldier have use that and it be destroy . my grandmother 's home -- which be my aunt 's home who come back , stand . the home be totally strip of everything inside . there be nothing but wall and window leave . and w-we move into this home .", "he in turn , make contact for we to be able to hide out with he . then he sister\u2011in\u2011law be with he , she come to he , she name be Brema I believe , with she son , he be a red\u2011headed boy . and then my father 's cousin come with he girlfriend , and then he brother and he wife come out , and my other cousin and my aunt , where I tell you I pull over my water on I from the samovar , she come instead of my grandparent , and my father get very upset and they go back to get my grandparent at which time they make a wrong turn and get catch and the way it be tell to we by some farmer , he be imprison and he try to buy he way out of prison with a piece of gold by one of the guy that be suppose to be release for be in there for drunkenness , and he figure if he have one piece of gold to give he , he have a lot more and he start fight with he and at that point they discover that he be jewish and they march he naked to the cemetery and execute he . so at that point we have lose all hope of get my father 's family , which be still in the ghetto , out . I we , people frequently ask , do you have any weapon ?", "all what we have be either take away or destroy by the Nazis . so can you imagine a family of five person -- three sister , two brother , two parent -- and a additional family of my grandmother and my uncle and my -- my aunt . that nothing -- nothing but nothing remain , and that we be just with we naked body -- naked body -- force to leave . and this be , of course , even better than to be destroy . and about the part of destruction , I will tell you now .", "SUBJECT : and then they take he -- then they take my -- and I hear when they get there -- when they get there , they separate they , just the mother-in-law . they take off the clothes . she be naked , you know , the old one . and -- and my sister be tell I , my older sister , she say to I , when my sister go , then Mengele see my sister . interviewer 1 : that be where already ?", "and then they take we in . they frisk we . they take my ... a matron take my mother and I in a room and tell we to strip and ... uh ... and ... uh ... the matron say to I , `` be not you afraid ? '' I say , `` no . '' -lrb- laughing -rrb- and then ... and then ... uh ... they ask to see we id , so my father produce we fake id and they say , `` who do you think you be kid .", "for the first time in my life -- I come from a home where I be very modest , you know . I be not wear slacks at home . I never undress , even from my own parent in front , since when I be already little older , you know . and here you have to disrobe completely naked before stranger . some girl have they monthly cycle and nothing to shield themselves with .", "you know , I do not want to belittle . you know , let he rest in peace where he be , or be wherever he be . and lo and behold , I sit down and write 16 page , write tear and blood , tell what have happen to my family , what happen the way they make they go down , the way they make the woman to undress , they way they beat they . and my grandparent be they father and mother . my father -- my grandparent be they father and mother .", "but the farmer want to monkey business with she on the way and take she off the -- off the wagon . and she be -- she carry a whip in she boot . and then she get herself disengage from this farmer , take out a whip , and whip that farmer really badly , and leave he there -- actually , naked . and she take the horse and the wagon and drive into the ghetto . and I meet they later on in the ghetto .", "and I be tell two version , I be not -- I be not sure which be right . one that the -- the farmer who agree with my mother to hide my sister -- one person , my sister , that he denounce she because he want the violin . and the other one be that she be denounce by someone else and she be parade naked through the main street and then they murder she . I do not know which be the right story , but that be what I be tell by my neighbor when we come back to learn the fate of the rest of we family , and -- Q : so you find that out --", "they have be -- my father be take before , and my mother be take to a camp szebnie , which be with my brother . and the -- I know later on that they have be -- my brother be take a week before my mother to Auschwitz , and later , my mother . and I know sure it be she be kill in Auschwitz , because my cousin , my first cousin who escape , who she be here in Israel , she recognize she when she be naked already , go to the crematorium . she see she . and my mother recognize she .", "and I manage always to sneak in the ghetto and sneak out and come and go . INT : you would leave the ghetto ? js : very often -- I use to leave in the -- instead , I see child lie dead on the street , grow people lie dead on the street , naked because somebody take they clothes off already and the horse-drawn wagon that pass by and pick up the body and pile they on a wagon , horse-drawn wagon . two man would pick they up like you pick up garbage over here and then bury they in a common grave outside a ghetto in a cemetery , over -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . and I start sneak out the ghetto ."], "topic_words": [15, "0.092*\"father\" + 0.076*\"sister\" + 0.066*\"hear\" + 0.055*\"home\" + 0.054*\"brother\" + 0.053*\"pick\" + 0.031*\"find\" + 0.029*\"friend\" + 0.028*\"rest\" + 0.025*\"ghetto\""]}, {"texts": ["we have like a -- a dinner time , and a breakfast time , and around that place be a beautiful lake , and you could swim in the lake , and I -- we do not have anything to -- to swim in , we be naked , swim naked . it be only girl . and -- and in the side be beautiful forest , and we use to go to -- into the forest naked . and then th-the boy find out what there be girl swim naked . so they use to come with little boat , boat there , and -- and we do not care because the Germans see -- see we all naked .", "do not matter , she think I -- we be in a -- in a quarantine with a kitchen . they give we ea -- a few of we , you know , l-live together in a room , and they -- they cook . we have like a -- a dinner time , and a breakfast time , and around that place be a beautiful lake , and you could swim in the lake , and I -- we do not have anything to -- to swim in , we be naked , swim naked . it be only girl . and -- and in the side be beautiful forest , and we use to go to -- into the forest naked .", "it be only girl . and -- and in the side be beautiful forest , and we use to go to -- into the forest naked . and then th-the boy find out what there be girl swim naked . so they use to come with little boat , boat there , and -- and we do not care because the Germans see -- see we all naked . but it still , you know , somebody i-in a different country , they see we .", "and -- and in the side be beautiful forest , and we use to go to -- into the forest naked . and then th-the boy find out what there be girl swim naked . so they use to come with little boat , boat there , and -- and we do not care because the Germans see -- see we all naked . but it still , you know , somebody i-in a different country , they see we . so we be sit in the water , we do not want to get -- or we run to the -- to the forest .", "so , we use to be in a quarantine and every Sunday people from the city learn about it and they come to we be in with big fence but people go through the fence and they talk and they ask we question and they speak very well english and german , so one couple come to the and they see I and they say we be surround around three way with water . it be a lake , and you could swim but naked . the boy find out that these girl be swim naked so they come to see we naked there and so a couple come , a young couple , she be in the forty maybe forty and she look and she say would you like to be free and go out from the quarantine , and I say of course I would . so , she say I can make you a passport and you can get out . I be go to be you foster mother and we can adopt you so she do .", "there be a mother and a daughter sit near I . I do not think the daughter maybe be 14 or 15 year of age . he point out only to the mother and when the mother be still undress , the daughter quickly get up and undressed and follow she , and many other perish the same way . sometimes they would take we out and they would have those vicious dog and when they find out that somebody be a rabbi , I remember one be a priest even who try to hide the jewish child , and push the dog and you could see how the flesh be come off these people . sometimes they hang the people and the jewish boy who be in control .", "for about three month we have to be there because people use to get sick and a lot of they die , a lot . so , we use to be in a quarantine and every Sunday people from the city learn about it and they come to we be in with big fence but people go through the fence and they talk and they ask we question and they speak very well english and german , so one couple come to the and they see I and they say we be surround around three way with water . it be a lake , and you could swim but naked . the boy find out that these girl be swim naked so they come to see we naked there and so a couple come , a young couple , she be in the forty maybe forty and she look and she say would you like to be free and go out from the quarantine , and I say of course I would . so , she say I can make you a passport and you can get out .", "so she keep I with the woman . so I be the only boy with a multitude of naked woman . I mean , to a young kid to see all these naked -- I never even see my mother naked , practically . never mind all these old , young , skinny , fat , ugly , beautiful . they be all -- and it be -- and every -- everything be so depressing .", "she do not let I go with the man . so she keep I with the woman . so I be the only boy with a multitude of naked woman . I mean , to a young kid to see all these naked -- I never even see my mother naked , practically . never mind all these old , young , skinny , fat , ugly , beautiful .", "dg : they only one I know about that be Moll , I think -- Otto Moll . Otto Moll be a very , very -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- sadistic man . and he will -- when they be come in , you know , they would pick up about 20 young girl , you know , and just undress they , and try to shoot they in the -- in the -- in the place , you know , what they call they -- just the breast , and here . so that be Moll . so always from -- he be the guy bring the people to -- to the ramp .", "as we be go to a field -- we be near Chicago . we use to go joy ride all four -- five of we , include the dog . and so I see -- over a little bridge we be come over there be a boy -- young boy and girl naked , have sex , evidently . so my german shepherd dog look down at they . and I say -- and my child be sit in the car .", "they be very happy . they be cheerful at night , they be singing in they quarter . they have a beautiful sculpture , a still remember a beautiful sculpture of a naked woman in front of they quarter . one of they must have be a artist . make from snow .", "they be very happy . they be cheerful at night , they be singing in they quarter . they have a beautiful sculpture , a still remember a beautiful sculpture of a naked woman in front of they quarter . one of they must have be a artist . make from snow .", "I take my clothes and run down the stair and I do not want to do it . so then the teacher come over to my mother and she say do you know that you daughter run from school and my mother say no , why would she do that . and she say well she do not want to undress . and my mother say , well of course . she be very shameful of show she body you know .", "you be not a humanbee anymore . this be what I can not ... what I can not forgive the german that they ... they take off we ... systematically take ... take away we dignity . but undress we , many of the girl be young girl . they be virgin . they never see they parent naked , never see they mother naked , but all of a sudden we ... we have to go and get undressed ."], "topic_words": [16, "0.159*\"girl\" + 0.144*\"mother\" + 0.073*\"young\" + 0.046*\"time\" + 0.043*\"boy\" + 0.042*\"beautiful\" + 0.041*\"nice\" + 0.031*\"year\" + 0.027*\"care\" + 0.026*\"find\""]}, {"texts": ["I recall that Oskar Schindler just come out of jail not long before we come to Brunnlitz -lrb- Brnenec , Czech Republic -rrb- . when we already be in Brunnlitz , this Amon Goeth who conduct all these hanging and shooting and murderous act in Krakow Plaszow also appear in Brunnlitz . at one time , I remember see he but this Amon Goeth be no longer the Amon Goeth of the ss guard with the almighty power but somehow they strip he of all he rank while he be in jail . because he be in jail at that time , as rumor would have it , for steal the transport of food that would arrive into the concentration camp from some jewish organization abroad or Red Cross or something . that he be steal those and he be turn they into gold and diamond and other thing .", "and it be very easy for the german to look at the birth certificate and see , because that be there . the only people who escape that be people in large city where they -- it be easy for they to move , you know , they just do not stay with the -- but a little town like mine , everybody know who be jewish and those who do not rat on each other and -- but it be all record in the -- in the city hall of who be jewish and who be not . and in large city the other thing they do be that they make the man undress cause every jew be circumcise and there be no christian that be circumcise for health reason at that time . so if people be in doubt , or if they feel the soldier that they be -- somebody be escape , they would make they get undressed . Q : when the political situation change , how much of that do you understand ?", "it be a half island . its name be OgygiA : there we escape from Athens , and from there with the help of the partisan , we pass by sea to Turkey , and from Turkey , we go to Syria , and the city name Halab . and there exactly the English troop defeat the Vischi Government , and they catch we like illegal immigrant and take we to the Gaza Strip in Army camp , and then come the jewish agency , and we escape , and we come to Tel Aviv like illegal citizen . Q : I be go to ask you to go back a little bit , and just give I a little bit more detail . a : okay .", "they do not know that there be jewish people live there . so my relative tell I that they want I to go and check some relative that be live in town and see if they be alive . I take my band , my Red Cross -- because I work in the hospital you get a strip -- and I walk out from the house to visit the relative . and walk the street , I see people lie dead in the street and I meet some german . they do not recognize that I be jewish , that I be a jew , and they ask I in German where be jewish living so I decide to keep quiet and tell they that I do not understand german , because when I will speak German they will recognize that I be a jew .", "and you could sweep away a shovel of flake every day from under my bed . it be itch so terrible . I be run out naked outside to freeze for the itch because it be itch so terrible . I do not know what to do with myself . finally , the american doctor and the german and the doctor from the camp , which be also polish , come with the military Red Cross van and they take I -- this be ambulance -- they take I to Erlangen Universitat Health Clinic -- university skin school .", "there be time when they take kid , in the village , they take they to Germany and I be very scared because I be circumcise and I think that whenever they have something like that surround and take the kid to Germany from the village , I be hide and very fast because they use to say they take they a certain place and because the Germans want only healthy people , so somewhere near they would take they to quarantine and check whether they do not have any t.b. . they want healthy people . so I be afraid if I be go to undress before doctor , they will recognize that I be jewish . so , I be very sure , at the risk of my life to escape those situation where they could not catch I to Germany . funny thing , sometimes I figure I could have go because one of my neighbor boy be catch then he escape from Germany he tell I do not have anything like that .", "HW : -- before Schindler . INT : good . HW : and -- and we see jewish girl that be strip naked and shot over there . they bring they from -- from the ghetto , from Krakow itself , because they be sort of on Aryan papers . in other word , they -- they pose as Poles .", "I do not know what the English be go to do with they , but help the english people fight Germany . and we want to sign up . when they take I for a medical examination , which they undress we completely . at that particular point in Cuzar I be reject because they find out that I be circumcise and I be jewish , not polish even though I speak polish and my uncle speak polish and we be bear in Poland , but because we be jewish they do not accept we . and they give I a document , in polish it be write _________ .", "there be -- he always have a translator for these foreign worker . and he examine I . I have to strip naked . he notice I be circumcise . he notice that something be -- but he ask the translator he should ask I whether I have some operation when I be a kid on my genitals .", "they undress in the open air . it be hot , very hot over there . they undress all the man , put they in a line , and they -- and that be the examination , the medical examination for the polish people . when they see -- the Jews they could recognize , because they be circumcise . and the polish people be not .", "they be lie . then they open up atellager in Auschwitz , or they take in kid like in a kindergarten , and all the thing -- they promise they all in the world , you see , if the Red Cross come , we have kid here , we have good -- everything be cover up , like in Theresienstadt , too . and then they take the people to -- to -- the -- the people be fight -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- bare naked . they say , `` you promise we , we -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- why you do it to we ? '' so they be beat up over the head .", "so they take also Halab , and we be -- become a few day after the occupation of Halab by the british soldier . so they ask who be you , and we say we be illegal citizen , that we come from Greece , and we want to go to Palestine , and they say okay . they take we , and they bring we to the Gaza Strip . it be a very big English camp there , and from there , we escape to Tel Aviv . it be June ' 44 .", "he must have be -- after he lose a great amount of weight , the uniform hung on he . it do not fit he anymore . he be strip of he rank . there be no longer any spic and span in he . and as we know now , there be a good chance that Amon Goeth come out of jail , arrive to Schindler if Schindler could help he out for the rest of the war .", "fp : one . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and he be take -- and my father be take to the gendarmerie , which be , at that time , the military police . when my father come back , he back be cut like spaghetti strip . and it be not -- I know the doctor come -- you know , the jewish -- a jewish doctor . he be not a doctor , a felcher , which be , in my mind , he practically know everything what a doctor do .", "and I certainly know that time be rough ; I know that something be happen in Germany . but I also know that there be a famine in China , you know , so - because there be a famine in China in the 30s , I think - so that I know that there be famine in China and I know there be something go on in Germany , but how that related to my personal life or to we , it be sort of far-fetched . I do begin , during the economic time , I do begin to feel certain pressure , and I do begin to feel certain anti-semitic , well , direct anti-semitic reference to who we be , but that be not on any scale - because as a child , you know , a child can call you a jew and he can call you baldy and he can call you any kind rotten name , and if you can rationalize to yourself within that context , you know how kid fight , and ... so , I be aware of a certain change in atmosphere in Poland because I do know now from study history that there be a wave of anti-semitism that be extremely , to the naked eye , it be easy to see , because , you know , when I translate - I be work on Korchuk -lrb- ph -rrb- a lot , Korchuk 's writing , and I translate he work - I realize that he only , the only reason for he be remove from the position of the good doctor , who read poetry and talk about child upbringe on the radio in the 30s , that he be remove from that position only because of anti- Semitism . he be a very progressive educator , as you know , and a very enlighten man and he be a jew , of course , by birth , but he be very polish in he upbringing and outlook , not christian , but Polish , and he bring all these new idea to Poland , because he study in England , you know , and he bring the new idea , the new approach to child upbringing , because he also write story for child , you know . he write book about child and book for child ."], "topic_words": [17, "0.095*\"jewish\" + 0.070*\"doctor\" + 0.067*\"german\" + 0.060*\"escape\" + 0.040*\"polish\" + 0.040*\"indecipherable\" + 0.032*\"examine\" + 0.028*\"afraid\" + 0.026*\"jew\" + 0.025*\"catch\""]}, {"texts": ["so , whatever we be wear , pants -- tear , not tear -- shorts , long sleeve shirt , a belt and of course the wooden clog -- which the girl wear it now and enjoy it so much . we never take it in to sell because every time I look at it I think , `` my God , my God . '' so we have to take it and tie it together ; we be completely naked . that be the end of 1944 , in December , and the snow be three or four or five foot high . they close the barracks and explode bomb in the barracks .", "they be killer . they be -lsb- german -rsb- , they use to call they . they be -- they have wooden sole and leather -- just leather thong on top -- strip on top , you know , to hold they . or there -- they be all , you know , like , close on top , you know . and -- but it be wooden , wooden sole .", "there be no air . and everybody be perspire , and it be so hot . the woman be sit half-naked , excuse I , we be sit naked or half-naked . there be no food leave , no water , nothing . so there be a meeting , the guy in charge , that we should go back through the oven and sit down the bench -- not bench -- bench , bunk , before you get undressed , to sit down and catch fresh air , and we will come in .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- the next area would be they would give you a pair of shoe , so-called shoe , which be a wooden sole with a canvas top over it . and you would get two rag about 12 by 12 as -- you would wrap they around you foot as -- as stocking . then the next area you would go , you would get two strip with a -- with a number on it , which would be you prison number . and then the next -- the next area , there would somebody stand and grab you arm and put you -- tattoo you number on you . INT : can you display you tattoo for the camera ?", "the side be sort of stiff , and -- but they only last one winter or maybe a winter and a half and I come through the sole , and I have frostbite , and they be pull up boot in sort of a nice brown leather , but much too soft for shoe . they be for a hatbox , not for shoe . but I have enough room below the knee to get a thin item into it like a strip of leather , and those I steal . Q : so , why be that you have never buy a pair of boot since then ? a : because I remember those boot .", "and we have to undress completely in one barrack and run out -- leave we clothes where they be , with shoe and everything , run out completely naked to another barrack , where there be shower and -- and where they spray we with -- brush we with some chemical liquid , delouse we . and we have a shower . we be take out of that -- -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- after the shower , out in the cold again , out in the rain , naked . we go to another block , another barrack , where we be give a pair of trousers , a striped -- all in striped clothes -- jacket , pajamas , and a shirt , and -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- some wooden shoe . they be -- the -- the sole be -- be not leather , but it be -- the sole be completely wooden , and the top be like canvas .", "and this guy , which he take the money , he tie I up over here . he say , run . he tie I up , my -- I be naked . well , December 6 , 1942 , cold -- the finger -- but we have one shoe , one sole -- one shoe . -lsb- backround noise -rsb- and right away , the guy tell I -- which I tell Elze Gellar -- you do not have a pair of shoe .", "and I be lucky , on this little boat we go to the left side of the bay and there be a u-boat schule9 -- now , what be that ? submarine school , submarine school . and we tie up this boat and we be naked and drown and no shoe and no nothing . hardly any , any -- you know , maybe some kind of a shirt but -- not even shirt . we do not have shirt .", "mk : well , when I come to Majdanek , we have to go out . and we be take to the -- to take bath to take bath . we have to have the belt put -- not in -- we have to undress with nothing on we and have the belt like this . if it be a belt , a double belt , and they find a double belt with something in it , you get beat up and maybe shoot . so a lot of people throw the belt away because the double belt have money .", "I do not remember what he do , but I be send with the other woman to a factory . there be all bench and seat . and we sit there , and we have to strip boot and shoe , leather boot and shoe , and put the piece all together . and I believe they be send to Germany later . yes .", "finally , someone open a window . and we sit there like this almost all night . and then early in the morning they have -- they take we to a room where they have a bunch of shoe , a bunch of shirt , and we have to run very fast to grab shoe and to grab shirt , because we be naked sit there . grab shoe , grab shirt . because the uniform we have from Krakow be take away .", "and -- and I be always ready and I say , I will go . I have no shoe . just wooden -- not even clog , just -- just the sole and there be just this strip of material on top . but I go volunteer . and with the girl , we be take this stuff off and singing , just singing .", "you have to be courageous , but it be very hard in a sense . so that when I think back really , if I would have to go through this again , I probably would not make it . so we be just practically naked , and my mom make for I a pair of sock from a empty bag of potato which use to be throw away from the kitchen . potato , pea . so I have a pair of pants make of a bag , and I do not have any shoe , so I have rag wrap around my foot .", "so I find a pair of tefillin and I cut the leather off and use it for a belt for a few week , until I get a belt in Germany . INT : would you pants not stay up without the belt ? JU : no , those prison -- they be give we strip prison pants . and they -- INT : but they do not have elastic or anything ?", "lb : then my brother and I , we be march into a barrack . and before we -- before we come into that barrack , we go to -- we be march off to a place in front of a -- some sort of barrack , a huge one . we be strip from we clothing , shave all over , and go in to take a bath . when we come out , everyone be hand some sort of a article of clothing -- a pair of pants , some sort of a jacket , a pair of shoe , sometimes two right shoe or two leave shoe , a pair of shoe from two different color , and so on -- just to be able to put on . INT : these be not uniform ."], "topic_words": [18, "0.177*\"shoe\" + 0.080*\"sit\" + 0.047*\"shirt\" + 0.045*\"top\" + 0.043*\"pair\" + 0.043*\"wooden\" + 0.042*\"pants\" + 0.033*\"boot\" + 0.029*\"wear\" + 0.029*\"belt\""]}, {"texts": ["answer -lrb- Adam -rrb- : now , you see , again on one of my trip when I be go over , you know , on the other side of Warsaw ghetto ... I be catch without my ... without the armband near the wall , near the wall by a Gestapo , by ss man . they arrest I , of course , and take I to the headquarters of the Gestapo in Warsaw which be outside of the Warsaw ghetto , in the polish sectioned area ... in the polish section . and uh they be very rude and uh , of course , after interrogation they take I to a room which be about eight by eight and the wall be full of fresh blood , red wall , and then they have uh wooden bench on the floor and into on top be break piece of glass cement into these bench and they , they use to force you to undress and beat you to death on those piece of broken glass . he say to I , you be go to undress and lay down on this . I say oh no .", "there be not mass killing , except when they bring in people from the outside , yes . we do not see they be -- but we know because they take so many young people to dig up ditch , you know . and they would bring truckload of people daily , shoot -- make they undress . they would beat they to undress and shoot they and bury they -- and then have to bury they . I have one friend who survive .", "they arrest I , of course , and take I to the headquarters of the Gestapo in Warsaw which be outside of the Warsaw ghetto , in the polish sectioned area ... in the polish section . and uh they be very rude and uh , of course , after interrogation they take I to a room which be about eight by eight and the wall be full of fresh blood , red wall , and then they have uh wooden bench on the floor and into on top be break piece of glass cement into these bench and they , they use to force you to undress and beat you to death on those piece of broken glass . he say to I , you be go to undress and lay down on this . I say oh no . I know ... why should i. .", "and the german Shepherd see with the ukrainian police . they rip he apart . and the rest of the people be walk to the street , to they grave , naked , up to the grave . for they , they dig another grave already because over there be full . when they come to the grave and they come outskirts of Brailov , which be next to the big grave , they have -- yeah , my brother , who be still in Brailov be tell by the ukrainian police a night before that you family , they bring they all back .", "we do not see they be -- but we know because they take so many young people to dig up ditch , you know . and they would bring truckload of people daily , shoot -- make they undress . they would beat they to undress and shoot they and bury they -- and then have to bury they . I have one friend who survive . he be Jew , he be shoot in he arm .", "they bring in representative from the neutral country , Sweden , Switzerland . they bring in the people -- representative , and they start to dig those gr -- mass grave -- those grave . and because the Russians , when they shoot those prisoner of war , they do not do it like the Germans do where they make they undress , shoe go to shoe , pants go to pants , jacket go to jacket , hair be shave . they remove jewelry . I mean , the Germans be quite methodical in they killing .", "and they take they and they shoot they there . they bring we information , for example , that one of my cousin , get out from the grave and he say , if you want , I will give you the hair off my head , but shoot we right . because about , they be all , they make they undress and they be shoot they and they be fall into the grave . but some be not shoot . they cover they when they be still alive .", "by the way , the priest be the biggest organizer . what they do with they be , they be take individually to about a half a mile away to a big , big barn . there they be strip completely of everything , they jewelry , whatever they have , they clothing , completely naked , and then individually they be escort by two Ukrainians , this be what be tell later , two maybe one , or three Ukrainians , it depend , to the place of the massacre , and imagine they already know when they be strip naked , where they be go , and that place be , there be already a ditch that be prepare , in those day they prepare a ditch in the bottom of a mountain , which I know exactly where the location be . it be call , a kever -lsb- grave -rsb- and there they say to those henchman , `` here be yours . do whatever you want to do . ''", "and -- and they put all these thing in , include gold tooth , whatever be remove . you know . and then they be give a -- they be all stark naked , they be take to shovel , and they be to dig a mass grave . when this be do , they be force to face the ditch , and they be shoot in the back into the ditch . one man manage to climb out .", "so when -- when the war -- in 1939 -- when the Poles say they be not gon na give , and the English say they be gon na protect we , Poles say we be not gon na give nothing . so on -- on Friday , September the 1st -- I think it be a Friday -- I go with my father to the -- to iron supply to buy some metal he need . it be long strip of metal , so he need I to help he carry it home . it be long , maybe 10 foot . you know , I would take one end and he would take one end , and we would walk home .", "Gold tooth , glass -- I mean glass , by the hundred of barrel fill up , tall one . and all those people go to the gas chamber , be take off all the stuff from they . then we come into the shower , we -- we dix -- take off -- cut off we hair , the woman 's hair too -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- and they give we strip -- blue striped , blue white striped uniform , and a number . you be gon na be -- live -- you -- this be gon -- you be gon na live by that number . you have get no name , you have get no origin , all you have be a number .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- that be it . INT : do you ever find out what happen to you family ? js : well , I do meet a woman who tell I that my mother be in a group of woman , about 200 of they , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- that , either in 1942 -- I be not sure which date -- or the beginning of ' 43 , be march out into the wood by the ukrainian collaborator , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- give shovel to dig , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- tell to undress , and they be all mow down . there be a mass grave in the outskirts of the city . they have a light , there , burning , a eternal light .", "she tell we what be go on over there in the cemetery when they bring the people . they have to dig they grave , a trench . they undress they and they shoot they with a machine gun . they fall down and the Poles be stay over there and take off the rest what be over there -- for sample , the stocking or the underwear . they rob they .", "02:08:02 anyway , they take we to the ... uh ... uh ... ss office where Gestapo be over there . stryy -lsb- polish : stryj -rsb- be a big city and there be one Gestapo be there and there be about five Ukrainians . they tell we to undress . we undress . and at that time one ukrainian hit I in my throat with the fist and I be start to choke and when he want to hit I again , the Gestapo man start to yell at he , forbid to hit .", "in the death sector I will explain . and they make from these two farm house gas chamber , yes . two barracck where the people take off they belongings and then they be pull to these gas chamber naked and they be poison there , yes , and from this they be pull out by ______ commander and put in the grave , in the uh , mass grave . -lrb- yes -rrb- . yes , in the mass grave ."], "topic_words": [19, "0.130*\"bring\" + 0.128*\"undress\" + 0.096*\"shoot\" + 0.065*\"grave\" + 0.038*\"dig\" + 0.030*\"ghetto\" + 0.025*\"blood\" + 0.025*\"wall\" + 0.025*\"ditch\" + 0.022*\"catch\""]}, {"texts": ["I mean , not internal obviously , but do you have to undergo examination -- subject 2 : yeah , they check before -- as I say , when we go from Auschwitz to Warsaw , they check we again . we have to strip , and then they check we if you have anything on you . interviewer : be you aware that people be be exterminate ? subject 2 : when we be in Auschwitz , I would not believe it be a gas chamber .", "interviewer : you be -- SUBJECT : when they say , right , they -- to Auschwitz . interviewer : you be naked in front of these -- SUBJECT : yeah , sure . it be five -- such big german soldier .", "Auschwitz be just more than work or torture . Auschwitz be the -- how shall I tell you ? Auschwitz be the place where you be naked -- emotionally naked , spiritually naked , and of course physically naked . you come to that place . you know that you will not get out of it .", "to report to the -- to the temp -- to the -- to the -- I do not know where they -- to Auschwitz , because we be a branch from Auschwitz . it be where they take the number , and we be a branch from Auschwitz . interviewer 1 : when they ask the young girl to undress -- SUBJECT. : yeah . interviewer 1 : -- what happen after they undress ?", "we not ask anything -- we be just ask to eat because we be hungry . Q : where there any instance of violence against the Germans ? a : no , just that they undress they but you know the Americans they behave unbelievable . one night we go and this cook we have with we -- she say would you like good chicken soup -- that be so cute . so you know what she do -- there be a peasant living there and some chicken run around .", "interviewer 2 : back to you as a young girl have to walk past soldier , past man . SUBJECT : yeah . interviewer 2 : completely shave , naked . well , we can not . we have to do the um - but I want the answer .", "interviewer : man be do this to -- and woman be there naked ? subject 1 : yeah , all of they . how many man you see run around naked and woman naked till they give you something to cover . subject 2 : when I -- when I come to Auschwitz and I see the woman , you know , I pass through the camp , from the woman camp . they be all separate .", "SUBJECT : from -- yes . till here , maybe . interviewer 2 : and you be naked ? SUBJECT : naked , yes . interviewer 2 : the rest ?", "how can you hide something ? subject 1 : you could not hide anything . interviewer : man be do this to -- and woman be there naked ? subject 1 : yeah , all of they . how many man you see run around naked and woman naked till they give you something to cover .", "till here , maybe . interviewer 2 : and you be naked ? SUBJECT : naked , yes . interviewer 2 : the rest ? SUBJECT : yes .", "SUBJECT. : I do not know why . I do not ask question , and I do not ask the girl later . interviewer 1 : who be watch you get undress ? SUBJECT. : he be only -- the only one that ever do . interviewer 1 : just one person be --", "interviewer : do you have glove ? SUBJECT : glove sometime . and when I be in Dachau later , we use to stay in glove for hour outside in the morning , striped clothes and the clothes be strip like this , the striped clothes with the number here . in the morning , when we come back from work for hour . interviewer : and it be cold ?", "INT : now , let 's just go back from before you be send to Auschwitz II . when you first arrive at Auschwitz , what do you remember of you first day there ? AB : when we -- yes , when we arrive at Auschwitz again , we have to undress . and we go through a selecktia , they call it -- selection -- where the ss officer , whoever he be , look at you . you have to run past he and back again naked .", "at that time , I be 16 -- over 16 , and the embarrassment be still very big . interviewer 2 : of be naked ? SUBJECT : of be naked , and -- and they would go around the one have develop better the body , or bigger bust . look for stronger people , and this today , maybe , it be a different story , but that time it be -- I can not even tell you that much because I never -- I just remember my aunt be with I -- the one that live with I , and many time we be look for a little red brick to color the cheek to look healthy , so I remember many time she be do this to I , and so these selection be very degrading . interviewer 2 : and that for you , it be not a matter of living or die , but this degredation , the shame of be there .", "you know , when I go through the selection and they be say , this be Mengel this -- I never look at he . at that time , I be 16 -- over 16 , and the embarrassment be still very big . interviewer 2 : of be naked ? SUBJECT : of be naked , and -- and they would go around the one have develop better the body , or bigger bust . look for stronger people , and this today , maybe , it be a different story , but that time it be -- I can not even tell you that much because I never -- I just remember my aunt be with I -- the one that live with I , and many time we be look for a little red brick to color the cheek to look healthy , so I remember many time she be do this to I , and so these selection be very degrading ."], "topic_words": [20, "0.331*\"naked\" + 0.166*\"Auschwitz\" + 0.061*\"interviewer\" + 0.039*\"subject\" + 0.033*\"time\" + 0.033*\"SUBJECT\" + 0.033*\"yeah\" + 0.018*\"question\" + 0.017*\"past\" + 0.013*\"camp\""]}, {"texts": ["Yeh , that be on the next day . where do you sleep on the first day ? by the time they get we off the train , Marilyn , it do not go so fast , by the time they organize we in one place and get we to undress , and then they haul we all into one big barrack , and everyone get shave off the hair , shave off like Dad standing and shaving ; my head wa ... and then they take we into shower , and then we come out and then it be already late in the night , by the time they get we into a barrack and they show you be you bunk bed be go to be , so Manya and I climb up to one , and Hela Shgivatch , and the next morning when we get out 5 o'clock in the morning we get out , `` appel platz '' to be count , by every barrack they get they people out to be count . we get so hysterical when we look at each other the first time without hair , you know . when they get we back , it be in the middle of the night , it be dark , nobody could see nobody , there be never light in the barracks , you could not undress or dress by light , whatever we have to dress or undress , so you could not see what you look , but when it start to get in the morning a little light , daylight would set in .", "by the time they get we off the train , Marilyn , it do not go so fast , by the time they organize we in one place and get we to undress , and then they haul we all into one big barrack , and everyone get shave off the hair , shave off like Dad standing and shaving ; my head wa ... and then they take we into shower , and then we come out and then it be already late in the night , by the time they get we into a barrack and they show you be you bunk bed be go to be , so Manya and I climb up to one , and Hela Shgivatch , and the next morning when we get out 5 o'clock in the morning we get out , `` appel platz '' to be count , by every barrack they get they people out to be count . we get so hysterical when we look at each other the first time without hair , you know . when they get we back , it be in the middle of the night , it be dark , nobody could see nobody , there be never light in the barracks , you could not undress or dress by light , whatever we have to dress or undress , so you could not see what you look , but when it start to get in the morning a little light , daylight would set in . and we look at each other , there be , people get so hysterical , cry , and laughing and , scream . I just can not describe to you the feeling what be be then , we all look like you know what , like we father 's , you know when a girl 's head be shave off , she look just like she father , in Manya I see she father , Manya see in I my father .", "that time , we already have -- we have -- we call it - they have a -- a steam room outside , yeah . a steam room , you go out -- I -- I do not know , you go out of the steam room wintertime , almost naked , then you run in in order to get -- in order to get rid of they . it be a problem because , you know , the bunk you sleep , each time -- you never undress , you never take you shoe off . you only sleep on -- you know , like -- like a -- it remind I the concentration camp , you sleep close to each other and -- and you know , it be -- it be bind to get from this -- from the -- from somebody else or from the sand and somehow , get infested -- get infested . but we f -- we , from the experience idis we discover , we learn , you know , we get rid of .", "but we get use to be already . that time , we already have -- we have -- we call it - they have a -- a steam room outside , yeah . a steam room , you go out -- I -- I do not know , you go out of the steam room wintertime , almost naked , then you run in in order to get -- in order to get rid of they . it be a problem because , you know , the bunk you sleep , each time -- you never undress , you never take you shoe off . you only sleep on -- you know , like -- like a -- it remind I the concentration camp , you sleep close to each other and -- and you know , it be -- it be bind to get from this -- from the -- from somebody else or from the sand and somehow , get infested -- get infested .", "and I could not believe it that that be what I have to do . and then I see everybody do it , so I know that that be what I have to do . and then we , we stay there all night , naked . and it be -- I remember -- as I remember , now , see one light bulb , one light bulb , and it be dark when the light bulb go out . and we -- as , as , as it become dark , people start to yell and scream .", "so once he find out that there be scarlet fever in barrack 27 , I be in the 27th barrack , he come in wa -- and the next day , must have be nine o'clock , I think , and he have always a sergeant walk with he . he do not have no gun , but the sergeant have the small pistol on -- on the side , I still remember they . so he use to come , and we have to stand naked , and he look at you . if you have like measles or pimple or something , that mean that you have the scarlet fever . and he take one look at you , he say wshht , this way .", "there be other disease transmit by lice and everything be full of lice . it be so bad in 1941-42 that if you walk in the street , and the street be extremely crowd , if a small wind come you could be sure that the wind bring with it some lice . the place that we live , we have a rule that everybody have to strip completely before we enter the apartment just to shake all the lice out . but in spite of that , in one apartment where we live a woman die of typhus . that be my first close encounter with death in the apartment itself .", "I never see it in my life one . and then gradually you learn that they be head lice , and they be skin lice , and they be gray lice , and they be black , black lice . in fact , on one occasion we be so full of lice the hungarian Army come down with a , this infection unit , where they take all we clothing -- all of it , we have to stand naked -- and they put it in like a pressurized steam sink where they figure they be go to kill they . but the sink do not work right , and do not produce enough heat . and what happen that all the egg that be lay by these lice , they hatch .", "sb : in the camp . bf : and , but this night of Pesach , they let we stand outside the whole night , and there be this , they stand -- we have lice -- we have those lice there this time . and so we have to , we stand the whole night naked outside . and we have to give we clothes , to get out of the barracks , to put we clothes . we stand night outside , and then we have to go to , I do not remember yet now what they do .", "Q : and how be you wake up in the morning ? a : First of all the light be switch on , I think at six o'clock in the morning , and there be a lot of noise , people yell , get up , get up . Q : do you have strip uniform ? a : yes . Q : and that be what you wear all the time ?", "-lsb- laugh -rsb- it be in complete contradiction to what be go on on the ground . this be about 11 o'clock at night and after the air raid be over , we go into we apartment and we lay down . we have do not undress but we lay down to have a few hour sleep . about 2 o'clock in the morning , there be a bang on the door , on we door and one of my uncle come in , and he say , get up , quick . everybody 's run away .", "and now in the barracks where the , uh , people , where there be six hundred in a barracks , there be two and three people in each bunk . they be so skinny from malnutrition that , uh , two people could sleep side by side very easily and they , there be so few bunk they have to take turn sleep . and , uh , uh , I take picture , movie inside the barracks and , uh , I will never forget these people be so weak that the one who have , be stronger , would strip the clothes off of the weak one who could not fight back and put those clothes on themselves because they be better for instance than they own . none of these people be issue clothes . they have uniform and when the uniform wear out at this late stage of the war , why they be nude .", "a door at one each -- a door at each end . and we have one bulb hanging from the ceiling in the middle , which go on for one hour at night , if it be a lot , okay ? and so we -- at night we strip to look for lice -- you know , lice ? and try to kill whatever you could find in you clothing . so I see he strip one day , and whatever he stomach be , be now a big flap hang there .", "we be put into these -- into these bunk , triple bunk . and there be just wooden plank there . there be five of we on a bunk , naked . and morning arrive very -- just a little while after . and we hear a gong , you know ?", "well -- and those two start cry , do not do that , you will give we out , they will kill we because of you . needless to say I do not listen to that , and I stay under one bunk bed , and that be it . and of course , I hear then , you know , they go to the next room where my sister be , and the room get empty , and I could see through the window , there be a window , the truck be wait there , and they climb naked into the truck . hour pass , and it get dark , and two ss man come in the room with lantern and dog and start , you know , look . Ser -- search light under the bunk bed , and do not find we ."], "topic_words": [21, "0.139*\"barrack\" + 0.133*\"night\" + 0.086*\"barracks\" + 0.077*\"lice\" + 0.056*\"morning\" + 0.052*\"sleep\" + 0.040*\"bed\" + 0.031*\"light\" + 0.026*\"middle\" + 0.023*\"bunk\""]}, {"texts": ["it be a huge transport , perhaps as many as 100 car . and then we be ask to walk forwards and undress . and we undress , and we come in front of a group of ss man . one of they be obviously the reign person , and he stand nonchalantly . and we walk , five of we in front of he , naked as we be , take in some air to show some chest , try to look strong , rub we cheek with we fist , so that they will look pink .", "and we undress , and we come in front of a group of ss man . one of they be obviously the reign person , and he stand nonchalantly . and we walk , five of we in front of he , naked as we be , take in some air to show some chest , try to look strong , rub we cheek with we fist , so that they will look pink . try to stretch out , so we would not have such small behind . and he just mimic .", "they put up a table . it be like a fashion show table , like a runway . and we have to walk naked on that table . and the ss man -- they sit on both side , and they look at we body , whether we be worthwhile saving , or be gas . I have this horrible rash , that I know I be go to be gas , because the gas be for -- the rash be from malnutrition and dirt .", "now that be -- that wa -- make a terrible impression on I . and then shortly after that , we have a selektion for work . and it be a fairly large table outside , and it be pretty cold , and we have to all strip naked again , and walk in front of this table . and there be a man , a representative from industry at one end , and two ss officer at that table . and he select very few people .", "we have to -- the yard be surround by ss . so we have to undress as we come in . men and woman have to undress completely naked with we little bundle in front of we , and we have to walk in front of these ss people . they have a trestle table . you have to give you name and you age , and walk in front of they .", "and really old , maybe two year old , older than -- than I . so we just walk up together in a give room . there be a bare table there , bare naked table , not woman . and -- and -- and two chair there , and one behind -- one behind the table there . and we just wait a few minute and -- and the door open and somebody walk in , sit behind the table , ask we name .", "thank God , after a couple day , they take we to Appellplatz . somebody think that this transportation of woman -- this be only for woman , Ravensbruck -- it will be -- be , be go to ammunition factory . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- everybody have to strip . I remember cold , because it be autumn . and in the middle be sit on the chair , a couple civilian man and couple ss man , ss man officer .", "and the one who still manage to walk straight do not get kick . psychologically , you know right there and then , you have get ta look at they at all time . you be naked , walk by they naked . walk straight , walk tall , look at they . the moment you be like this , you be in for it .", "I remember cold , because it be autumn . and in the middle be sit on the chair , a couple civilian man and couple ss man , ss man officer . and they , they let we go around in circle , naked . again , shock for I to be with old woman , with my mother . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- anyway --", "-- where we be -lsb- german -rsb- , on the yard . we have to -- the yard be surround by ss . so we have to undress as we come in . men and woman have to undress completely naked with we little bundle in front of we , and we have to walk in front of these ss people . they have a trestle table .", "I do not know . I do not know . I only know that we be to march in front of -- of ss officer in uniform , and then they look at we naked and say , you go there , or you go there . if people could not walk very well or could not -- have bone be show , and they know that this be the end of they strength . but we be always tell , you must walk up very straight and march , so that you should not be select .", "there be a table here . and he be sit on the table . and we have to undress , put we clothes in here . and we have to come out in front of he . and he be usually say to -- when you come in front of he , naked -- he look at you and he say , leave .", "we be surround by ss woman and ss man . now come the torture . when I find myself without hair , naked , and look around with the 500 people who I do not recognize they at all , ss woman tell we -- among we -- we should get up on the table because we must have some that hide diamond . now , they put we on a table and they want to examine we like a gynecologist if we do hide diamond somewhere . I plead with she , I never have be marry .", "INT : but , but the , the sort of -- ls : concentration camp . we have to parade naked in front of the ss man . we , we have ss man , you know , -lsb- non-english -rsb- to watch we . INT : guard .", "but I understand that my brother be on the same transport , also come from the other camp to Auschwitz with the same transport . it be a huge transport , perhaps as many as 100 car . and then we be ask to walk forwards and undress . and we undress , and we come in front of a group of ss man . one of they be obviously the reign person , and he stand nonchalantly ."], "topic_words": [22, "0.219*\"walk\" + 0.169*\"ss\" + 0.165*\"front\" + 0.127*\"man\" + 0.054*\"table\" + 0.025*\"sit\" + 0.015*\"officer\" + 0.015*\"straight\" + 0.011*\"parade\" + 0.011*\"chair\""]}, {"texts": ["they take she away in Bergen-Belsen they do not take the people and burn they or put ` em , or bury they , they just pile they up outside of the barracks in front of we door , and the pile be as high as 6 or 7 foot of corpse in , in front of each barracks we live with the dead people , and this be where Christian be . and for day , I could not look at Christian because I know she be lay there , and one day , my guilt be bother I so because I know she be there and I would not look at she , I decide to go see she . and when I look up at she , I see Christian , but something worry I and puzzle I , and I do not know what be wrong , and I say uh , somebody steal she skirt , and she be lay from waist down , naked as a skeleton , which they call in Au -- in Bergen-Belsen be a musselman , which mean uh , before you die you be skin and bone , you look like a musselman which be a skeleton , and she be a skeleton lay there , and she have a navy blue jacket , but the navy blue jacket be not blue , it be grayish or white , and it puzzle I , I say , why would somebody steal a skirt and change a jacket from a blue one to a white one , and not take everything and just leave it there , so I lean over closer to the pile of the dead people , and there I see that Christian blue jacket be cover with terrible lice . the lice be a big as the black ant that you see sometimes in ground , and they be just crawl all over Christian 's body and the jacket , and , and that make that blue navy jacket white , and I could not take it anymore , I almost fall on the dead , on the dead people myself , I be in such shock . and I just run away because I , I be in terrible shock , I , I , I see the terrible lice eat she up , and it it be just too much for I to take , and I never look at Christian again .", "and then she add to that , I bring it from the ghetto . of course this , -lsb- laugh -rsb- this be a kind of excitement because I know the procedure by this time , that you could not take anything into , in-into a concentration camp . -lsb- cough -rsb- people be strip of any possession they have and there be no way of carry a prayer book into a camp and uh hold onto it , and I of course ask , how do you do it , and she tell I that when they give she she first working transcript : not spell check or verify for accuracy . Wentworth film liberation/dp 2/10/95 RABBI ABRAHAM KLAUSNER Page 7 allocation of bread , they give she a heel of a loaf , and she cut or tear a slice but not completely , make a hinge of it . and then dig out the crumb in the heel of a loaf of the bread , and put she little prayer book and carry the bread with she and of course bread be something you be not go to , you be not go to steal one from the other , and so forth .", "so , suddenly we all start turn around from curiosity look for familiar face . and some couple even recognize each other . not that they be related , or maybe they be neighbor and they be hug , and nobody give it even a thought of be naked , I mean there be , -lsb- laugh -rsb- you know today they would make a x-rated movie here . but there be nobody uh , work transcript : not spell check or verify for accuracy . Wentworth film liberation/dp proj .", "he even write a book , and that be where I find out about he existence because in those day , SWB : you do not know . bud brodecki : I do not know , I have no idea . SWB : tell I again the story of when you be in the public bath after the liberation and when everyone sort of forget they be naked and start look for people who know where they family be . work transcript : not spell check or verify for accuracy . Wentworth film liberation/dp proj .", "I remember we have to undress , and it du -- do not matter if there be man , woman . it be one corner there with maybe a sheet hanging in between . you have to strip completely and then they put a hose on you . and the hose have white -- it look like white powder . and that powder , I can still smell it .", "we have to -- it be pack in a bag , in a paper bag with we number . of course , we do not have the number then but after the shower then we be issue prison uniform . we get long underwear , striped , you know , blue and white stripe but very , very narrow underwear , and then we receive striped , one-inch white striped , white and blue trousers and jacket and a cap , also strip . then we be issue to swatch of white cloth with a number . my number be 13390 and two red triangle .", "Q : can you remember any of the book and film that you have read or see that you think be worthwhile ? a : I and my wife have a book there which be from Latvia , take from german picture of Europe . they be show scene in Latvia where the Germans actually take picture where the woman be stand at the grave naked . and you may have see those picture someplace . this book be print by the Russians !", "a : well we pick up the goose , and it -- carry it in a -- a tapestry bag and apparently a dog pick up the scent and follow we until we get to the trolley . and get into the trolley , nobody notice that the dog be follow we . I get home , I have a navy coat on -- I wear , and I have a navy sweater , and when I undress , I be navy . the color -- I must have perspire so from fear , that -- th-the colo -- the color come off . Q : be this the kind of thing you be actually able to laugh about in the moment ?", "a : no . strip be to put it be call photo offset printing , lithography . and they do something call Goldenrod , and the film on which the stuff be print be cut out and that be call strip . Q : Stripping . a : and then they put it on a press .", "-lsb- laugh -rsb- and anyway , so we -- they give we -- they give we a whole book of description of german war criminal and -- that we be to look for . they give we all kind of tattoo and all kind of thing they know about these people , and that we be try to find they . and so we be -- and we be to strip search everybody we see . and I say , woman and -- he say , anybody , you strip search . just be sure they have no contraband , no war contraband .", "that be a painful question . and we have to think hard how to answer . but you be mostly -- not only we , but generally speak -- people be deprive of they possession , deprive of they family , be throw from one corner to another , one corner of the world to another , be humiliate , be strip of they clothes , shave of they hair , print number on -- tattoo number on you hand . and that be a person . and be in this spirit or close to it , how could you think of fight ?", "they be teach how to make woman 's hair net . it be a fashionable thing at that time to do . they be take the car inner-tube or truck inner-tube and cut into small strip , very narrow strip . then they could buy white silk and then they be die the silk different color . be it a gold , gray , brown or black or navy blue .", "-lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- and as we disembark the train , we have to go through the gate . you have to take off you civilian clothing . they give you strip clothing , blue and white stripe , no underwear , and they give you wood shoe . the sole be thick wood sole and material , like a military -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . it be a hard material and shoelace if you have any .", "it be so -- so -- every german , I think , be a -- think of a sadist because that be the nature of they . when we come to Auschwitz , as I say to you , we have to go to the road and they cut off we hair . I get such hysterical -- ah -- laugh -- laugh cramp that I start to rub and I see my friend -- they look -- like -lrb- word miss in original transcript -rrb- , I start through the shower , the Germans be stand there naked -- I have to rush through the shower , you know . such thing , unbelievable . or they take all we -- we dress and they throw we .", "I have a jacket -- a striped jacket . it be go . I be practically naked , lie around there . they take I up , put I away in the -- this be March , in 1945 , March . and I be lie there , and I start -- I be lie , I remember , still , cry , cry , cry -- nothing else but cry ."], "topic_words": [23, "0.184*\"give\" + 0.066*\"start\" + 0.056*\"put\" + 0.052*\"laugh\" + 0.044*\"white\" + 0.035*\"good\" + 0.035*\"jacket\" + 0.028*\"carry\" + 0.028*\"find\" + 0.023*\"blue\""]}, {"texts": ["like I call it a lawn -- before you get into the crematorium , be a little lawn . but the lawn be , be fence around with , with , with little bush you should -- you should not be see through . and , and , and sometimes when transport come , if there be not place inside in the mortuary to undress -- because there -- there be not a mortuary in the undress room -- it be -- in 2 and 3 it be . so they tell they to undress on , on this lawn . so they take in the whole kommando and lay they out on the lawn .", "because by the transport , by the shipment , when they finish , when they undress -- the kommando undress , we be by the oven . and he be the kapo . and after the undress , they -- they -- they chase he to the -- to the gas chamber . they close the door . the knock -- they close the door and you could hear the knocking , knocking , knocking .", "but the lawn be , be fence around with , with , with little bush you should -- you should not be see through . and , and , and sometimes when transport come , if there be not place inside in the mortuary to undress -- because there -- there be not a mortuary in the undress room -- it be -- in 2 and 3 it be . so they tell they to undress on , on this lawn . so they take in the whole kommando and lay they out on the lawn . they go from one to one and shoot they in the neck .", "and we would see endless column enter these building and never come out . I work directly behind gas chamber and crematorium , now know as number four . and it do not have a undress dress room . and so we would see the people change , or get undressed -- not change , but get undressed -- in front of the gas chamber and crematorium on the beautiful green lawn , as we pass by they to go to work . we just pass they by , and make a left turn on the other side of the gas chamber and crematorium , and just a few foot , and we be at we work place .", "this photo be one of the boxcar with the side door open . here be another photo of that . and after we get in and be give duty assignment , we be give a tour by some of the prisoner which include the they show we the gas chamber where they line up the concentration prisoner and have they undress and go through the what they think be go to be a shower , a delouse shower . and they march they into these gas chamber and gas they . and then right in the room next to the gas chamber be a large room that have the body just throw helterskelter , just mount up like cord wood , again wait to be burn in the furnace which be in a adjacent part of that building .", "but generally , he handle he . and I guess he bribe he too . because by the transport , by the shipment , when they finish , when they undress -- the kommando undress , we be by the oven . and he be the kapo . and after the undress , they -- they -- they chase he to the -- to the gas chamber .", "they take between 500 and 600 people . and they make the job when they come out from the gas chamber . they have to pull they out from the gas chamber -- they be already naked , anyway -- and put in this crematorium . a crematorium oven , you could not go in more than 25 person at once . as they say , the way I hear -- I see , later , the crematorium -- it take about 20 minute to burn the body .", "ok . here on this end , I be one of the person unload the belongings of hungarian jew that be bring there , May 1944 , that already be gas . this come from the zunda -lrb- ph -rrb- , from the gas chamber , from the undress room . this photo , by the way , be give to I by historian , czech historian , czechoslovakian historian , jewish man . he name be Erich Kulka .", "when they really have mass production like at Buchenwald , they have -- at Buchenwald they have a battery of 12 furnace , and each furnace have four rack in it so they could cremate 48 body at one time . and then there be trap door underneath the furnace that the bone would drop down through and there be a grind mill down below that they grind up these bone and sack they for fertilizer . and Buchenwald , what they use to do , they would bring the people in to a room where there be hook all around the wall and tell they to undress , that they have to go in to a shower room and bathe . so they all take off they clothes and hang they on the hook and then they would go into the shower room . and this room be about 30 by 40 foot , and in the ceiling , it look a -- space all over the ceiling , it look like shower head .", "they strip for the shower and be bolt into the room . the victim realize too late that gas , not water , come out of the nozzle . all the body be completely strip of jewelry , gold tooth , and any other item of value before be throw down a chute into the oven room . there be a administration building in front of the entrance gate with lab for medical experimentation on human . many lamp of tattooed skin be show to I by the inmate in grisly display .", "today they be call different number . and the gas chamber be not underneath , in a cellar , but the same floor . and there be another crematorium , 1 and 2 , which be the more modern one , where the crematorium be underneath and also the room where they have to undress . anyhow , we could know where they -- where they be go . so that be the beginning of the hungarian transport .", "sometimes they take people out any time , anybody to do different kind of work . what they do , they cut the hair of the woman . the woman go to the gas chamber after the man and then they stop , about one or two barracks before the gas chamber be a barrack where they leave they luggage and they have to undress ; and there be a barrack the next to the gas chamber where they cut at randomly , they cut the hair of the woman . they utilize it . they send it back to Germany ; they do for brush , for everything .", "Nonstop . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- then when they go in , they -- they take they to a room . they undress themself . and they send they to the -- to the -- where the gas room be . they gas the people first , and then they take they to the oven .", "it have number with hook , and also a lot of bench . the Germans be tell they not to forget they number , because when they come out , they can find they place . they undress . and next to a hallway , there be the gas chamber . the gas chamber hold 2,500 people , because this be one of the largest one .", "both room be still fill high with gas , shoot , hang , and tortured dead body , a sight I shall never forget . most all body in the room number three be dress in prison clothing , striped suit . yet , but all body in room number one be naked . oh darling , it be a horrible sight . the gas chamber be a room with airtight steel door label , shower bath . '"], "topic_words": [24, "0.251*\"room\" + 0.179*\"gas\" + 0.141*\"undress\" + 0.126*\"chamber\" + 0.048*\"crematorium\" + 0.020*\"enter\" + 0.015*\"oven\" + 0.010*\"transport\" + 0.010*\"finish\" + 0.010*\"photo\""]}, {"texts": ["you have to remember a bowl of watery soup with some leaf or some piece of potato in it for two people who each one of they equip with he own spoon and and this be ready make for conflict and combat and and and and uh the the spilling of soup and so on , but somehow before I arrive a a custom be develop over there where the two prisoner , skeleton-looking hungary prisoner who would be give this bowl of soup to share , would feed each other , so if you give I half a spoon , I give you half a spoon . and if you dip down and find a piece of potato , I will dip down and give you a piece of potato , and so that custom or that habit or that arrangement which have both philosophical and not religious undertone , people manage to people who be stranger , people who be die of hunger manage somehow to be discipline and to go through that daily ritual of share the bowl of soup . after six week of work and hard labor ... oh yes ... I be I be forget something ... when we first come to Flossenburg , we be march by this young ss guard with they dog up the hill to the camp , we we be bring before a very large building in a kind of assembly area , and we be ... there be four hundred and fifty of we approximately , and we be all tell to undress , to leave we clothing on the floor and all we possession and we go in to take shower . now there be concern . there be speculation , because by that time we know about gas chamber .", "he take out I and my mother , and we , we come out , and he rescue we , the last hundred people . those 10,000 people have a terrible fate . they take they all to nine Fort , put they in the fort in 100 at a time , make they undress in the underground , and they machine gun they . and uh , the lithuanian guard , the lithuanian part -- the lithuanian partisan , lithuanian soldier , machine gun they and then cover they up with tractor with earth , and earth have move for three day , with the tractor and run over they to squeeze out the last breath , and when uh the front come closer , and start undigg they , and the same prisoner , pl-uh russian and jewish prisoner be still there , they find lay there , mother with child wrap around together , and they die together in the common grave . the , you can imagine we , we , we hurt , we sorrow what happen in the ghetto after 10,000 people be take out .", "anyway , they take they . it be all in summertime and they king -- they have a king that look like a Buddha , a very fat man , have always something wrap around he waist . he be all naked , very fat and he have , like , four woman around he , fan he , I guess . they be he harem or something , and they take whole bunch of they , maybe around a hundred gypsy , maybe less - but they didn \\ ' 92t have much , they just have some horse and whatever . they take they on wagon , horse-buggy thing .", "anyway , they take they . it be all in summertime and they king -- they have a king that look like a Buddha , a very fat man , have always something wrap around he waist . he be all naked , very fat and he have , like , four woman around he , fan he , I guess . they be he harem or something , and they take whole bunch of they , maybe around a hundred gypsy , maybe less - but they didn\u00edt have much , they just have some horse and whatever . they take they on wagon , horse-buggy thing .", "the officer have everything and what I do be , they ... I say I want you to get those guy drunk , as drunk as you can . I have six russian soldier , seven because we can only get seven wait on the side ... I know approximately the size of the officer because they come to visit very often , and they send I seven of they ... I get they so drunk they could not move . we undress they . we put the polish uniform on the russian soldier . they take , they steal six horse .", "do anything in particular come to mind when you think of these year ? a : yes , every day there be beat and kill and smash the prisoner , execution almost every day , every day a pill , yeah and they call the number go to work so what happen they take they outside the camp and execution , shoot they . and I think I remember by the end I be there they bring twelve thousand russian war prisoner to Auschwitz and as war prisoner , it be winter time , December , they be twenty four hour naked and a very cold night and snow even . then they put they into barracks and give they some kind of clothing but the food be very , very little so through the winter they almost all die out . there be only a few hundred left of those war prisoner .", "they be draft soldier for the russian army . be I be on the russian side , we have to go to a draft board . of course , it be real strange because we be naked and most of the people be woman , you know . and , uh , when they be measure you and this and that , and they ask I what kind of education I get , I say I get high school and I get electronics . and she say you be a lieutenant in the russian army .", "a : but they lose completely , because the army -- because the ar -- that be the army . Q : okay . a : and -- and I guess they be not the -- concerned about we , they be concern more of those soldier , because those soldier come naked almost , you know , to join the army , so -- so they -- Q : when you say they lose completely , they -- they completely forget you , or they -- a : I think so , because nobody sh-show up for we .", "and not until this morning , I do not pay attention , this be April the 13th , 1943 from Spaichingen , I be ship to Dachau . and at Dachau , I be put in in a barrack . there be hundred naked people in this one -- a lot of Russians , a lot of Russians prisoner -- a lot of russian prisoner of war . the lice be eat we up alive . it be like everything be move and everybody be cover with lice .", "now you have to understand we later realize that we be walk into some kind of a military pocket ... the Russians in the back of we and the Allied army in front of we , and uh in the middle of the night it be ... no , not middle ... it it it be just get dark ... the russian gun really uh send they shell and they come they come closer and closer , and almost threatening and at this moment I say to my friend ... we ... I see some of the polish people , polish political prisoner we have in we area , say well , this enough , we run . and I say to my friend , I think this be also the time for we to run , so we leave the the the fire and we leave the horse meat and we leave whatever ... but just whatever we could grab , especially a blanket or so , and we run towards a road . the ss be still there and when they see we or see we run , they be still shooting after we , but luckily uh we name tag be not on they on they on they bullet , and then all of a sudden uh we reach a area ... meantime it have become dark , where we be we be somehow in no man 's land , but not completely because on that road we have to reach , there we see the the remnant of the german army , also try to make they way to the north , and refugee obviously come from Berlin with all kind of vehicle , fire truck , hearse , milk truck ... whatever move , they have use , and sometimes put together because they do not have enough gasoline anymore , so they have tie ... have tie these together , and we then say well , probably the safest be to mix with these people , and after all , I have throw away the the the the strip coat and I take ... have throw ... not throw away but put it my pocket the the cap , so I I look at least like a civilian , and my friend also whatever they have . we mix with the the population , and uh so they walk rather slowly . there be no march because there be hundred and thousand of people , press towards the north .", "INT : how far be it from Bershad to Balta ? fr : it be about two day that we be take by horse and carriage -- sleigh actually , it be winter -- about two day . we be practical naked and after almost three year already . so we be take to Balta . and when I arrive to Balta , nobody be there to pick we up .", "as we be march down in Hamburg , we encounter a group of french prisoner who be they prisoner of war . but they be still get package through the Red Cross . but when they see we half naked , starve , woman , they start to take off they jacket , they scarf , they sweater , and start to throw it to we . so in a day or two , we start to like half like prisoner and half -- I mean french prisoner because we have they jacket and they hat . later , they make a underground passage because the building in which we be house be halfway under water .", "and I recall during April of 1970 , after the intrusion into Cambodia and a few other event that happen in the ` 70s , I still recall some graduate student all exercise and upset over the military , and that it be go to widen the war in Viet Nam , and the chinese and Russians be go to come in by all of we activity and I say , `` no . '' and I recall tell some rabid , very active group here that I be more concerned about what be happen in Egypt . they be pooh-pooh , over whether the russian mig be buzz the israeli plane on the Gaza strip , and they be ready to take over , until we get word to the egyptian government about what the Russians be do , and they kick they out . but that save the Middle East . otherwise , the Russians be ready to take over .", "they be put in freight train , and each of these freight `` wagon '' be completely close , and they pack the people in to the point that it be usually could be twenty people , let 's say twenty soldier , would be in , but this time they put hundred people , old , young , without any water , and they lock it and the train eventually go to somewhere . when this be describe , the circumstance , it become very obvious to I and to all of we that the future of those people be very gloomy , and this be something much more serious than a matter of take away this , or take away that , from certain people . it be a matter of life-threatening situation , and they , of course , be completely strip of they whole property . from there on , then , I have personally no , whatsoever , expectation from the Germans except to be kill . Q : then until 1944 , until the german invasion , you have mobilization , there be a hungarian army , that be fight ...", "I say at this time to myself , register in you mind whatever be go on . with God 's help one day you might be be be call to give evidence about that , so somehow I I try and not to forget and uh then we ... after that ... in that ... then we be in that shower . a man come also with a uniform , with a strip uniform , and we ask he who be you and he say I be from Hamburg . I be a political prisoner , a jew but a political prisoner . I have take part in the uh fight of the of the spanish Republicans against Franco ."], "topic_words": [25, "0.154*\"prisoner\" + 0.068*\"soldier\" + 0.045*\"hundred\" + 0.034*\"russian\" + 0.032*\"group\" + 0.031*\"thousand\" + 0.030*\"large\" + 0.029*\"wagon\" + 0.029*\"war\" + 0.029*\"blanket\""]}, {"texts": ["but it be a case that go on forever . and finally really be resolve in a very favorable way for the client in that housing project . I be think , another , when we talk about the effect case have , I represent a group over from Pike County , who , they be suppose to strip mine above they , they be go to strip mine this holler above they home in Poor Bottom off Maribone Creek over in Pike County . and the family be worry that the strip mine be right over they house and that the rock and boulder be ... so when we look into it , we learn that there be deep mine workings that have be work out inside the mountain and that if they strip mine around the front side , they be in danger of hit those old deep mine workings which be fill with water . and the water would then potentially be a real problem to the people down below .", "and finally really be resolve in a very favorable way for the client in that housing project . I be think , another , when we talk about the effect case have , I represent a group over from Pike County , who , they be suppose to strip mine above they , they be go to strip mine this holler above they home in Poor Bottom off Maribone Creek over in Pike County . and the family be worry that the strip mine be right over they house and that the rock and boulder be ... so when we look into it , we learn that there be deep mine workings that have be work out inside the mountain and that if they strip mine around the front side , they be in danger of hit those old deep mine workings which be fill with water . and the water would then potentially be a real problem to the people down below . it just could come out in gallon and wash away house .", "and a year go by and nothing happen , so he sue they to get he money . and actually in that suit someone , a deposition of he be take . and when he sell that property he say , `` I will give you the mineral and you may mine that property , but I want you to leave all the walnut , chestnut , and hemlock tree over ten inch , '' which make it impossible to strip mine . and so we actually argue initially it be not a Broad form deed , that this deed specifically be limit to deep mining because it be impossible to strip mine , because he have say that . and on deposition , which be ... the deposition from he testimony be still in the courthouse .", "and actually in that suit someone , a deposition of he be take . and when he sell that property he say , `` I will give you the mineral and you may mine that property , but I want you to leave all the walnut , chestnut , and hemlock tree over ten inch , '' which make it impossible to strip mine . and so we actually argue initially it be not a Broad form deed , that this deed specifically be limit to deep mining because it be impossible to strip mine , because he have say that . and on deposition , which be ... the deposition from he testimony be still in the courthouse . and in the deposition he reassert that , that he want those tree leave alone .", "ninety-two percent of the vote , people vote for the Broad form deed amendment , which show people know what they be do . in fact , I remember when , early when we have be here not too many year , the Courier-Journal I think do a informal poll . and something like ninety-three percent of the people think they should not allow anybody to strip mine you land without you consent . but I be then , one of my , the coal industry decide they want to challenge the constitutionality of that constitutional amendment as violate the federal constitution . because they claim that mineral ownership rights have be establish by these series of Kentucky case in the Supreme Court over the year and that people when they buy mineral rights expect to be able to legally surface mine .", "he want this thing to be more of a regional program because there be so many of the issue be common to the Central Appalachia , and that the state line really do not mean anything . the strip mining problem in Kentucky and West Virginia be the same . unregulated strip mining , land owner have they land tear up without they consent , and that sort of thing . so , I go down and talk to Harry Caudill . there be a woman , here on Mud Creek they be do a lot of , they be have a lot of problem around health issue .", "he be a friend of Paul Kaufmann 's , I think , and have be very , Kaufmann have put some people from Kentucky on he Board . he want this thing to be more of a regional program because there be so many of the issue be common to the Central Appalachia , and that the state line really do not mean anything . the strip mining problem in Kentucky and West Virginia be the same . unregulated strip mining , land owner have they land tear up without they consent , and that sort of thing . so , I go down and talk to Harry Caudill .", "and at the trial court , one of the attorney who be here then be handle , handle that case , and it be on appeal and it come to I and I take the case over . and we end up argue the constitutionality of the amendment in the Supreme Court . and the Attorney General argue in we support and the court then agree with we theory that they never have the right in the first place to grant the right to strip mine . so it take a lot of year , but finally the right be ... you can not today surface mine anybody 's land without they consent . Q : when do that final decision come down ?", "she be a wonderful person . they ... Joe be bear here in Floyd County , and he be part indian . we talk a lot about they history and the problem that he see , poor people , and that people be get run over by strip miner . because Kentucky 's court allow mining without , strip mining without land owner approval . because these out of state mineral owner have come here in the late 1890 and buy out all the mineral .", "they ... Joe be bear here in Floyd County , and he be part indian . we talk a lot about they history and the problem that he see , poor people , and that people be get run over by strip miner . because Kentucky 's court allow mining without , strip mining without land owner approval . because these out of state mineral owner have come here in the late 1890 and buy out all the mineral . we be talk about country people and be acceptance of outsider .", "she have organize that little holler . and it potentially be a really serious problem . we do a lot more strip mining work than we have in recent year because some of the lawyer who work for we be now do that in private practice . I just recently represent somebody in Letcher County , whose name have be leave off , they property have be leave off a mining map . they just leave they off because they do not ... and they know , they know that she own the property that they want to mine and that she be not go to let they mine .", "and so we oppose that permit and there be a lot of community pressure , a lot of help . and thankfully that be , we be able to fend that off . but we have be very much , you have have deep mining and strip mining and coal truck traffic , all the problem that you see all over , in one little spot here in David . you have the craft co-operative as a little , as a new , which have become fairly successful . it be a nice community .", "it be sort of the Appalachian , we have this big battle over a strip mining permit at one point . there be a large block of coal leave underground . I say strip mining . there be some strip mining attempt that we be able to fend off . but there be also a large amount of coal that have not be mine because they hit water in the mine .", "so the Slovak , two division go into Russia , advance all the way to the caucasian mountain . Q : but it be -- it be that -- well , really my question be , you life would change dramatically when you be 10 , be I right ? a : yes , yeah , life change dramatically because the Aryan law be put into effect by the slovak legislature , follow the script , the german script , and that mean Jews be strip , in a very methodical way of all property , all privilege . and it be a bureaucratically highly organize process of take property away . the -- it be very important that the various people who owe they loyalty to the Nazis and to the Slovak , be get as much property as possible .", "there be a large block of coal leave underground . I say strip mining . there be some strip mining attempt that we be able to fend off . but there be also a large amount of coal that have not be mine because they hit water in the mine . there be a attempt to re-open that , to start , to get a permit to mine that block of coal ."], "topic_words": [26, "0.170*\"strip\" + 0.045*\"mine\" + 0.044*\"lot\" + 0.037*\"year\" + 0.027*\"talk\" + 0.027*\"case\" + 0.023*\"part\" + 0.023*\"home\" + 0.019*\"mining\" + 0.019*\"problem\""]}, {"texts": ["thanks to the gold coin , food , you could obtain food during Ghetto time and get better accommodation for some good means to sustain yourself with gold coin . at that time , this be a very tragic time , because then Germans come they bring dog in the Ghetto , and they be go from house to house to look to see if you turn in all gold , and if you do not hide . and they even take some people to undress they completely , some woman to undress and the dog be train go and lick they sexual organ to make sure there be no coin of gold hide . Q : excuse I , what be that ? a : they have dog train , they use to take certain woman , tell they to undress completely , and the dog with its tongue would lick they sexual organ of the woman to find if they put any gold coin there .", "and they even take some people to undress they completely , some woman to undress and the dog be train go and lick they sexual organ to make sure there be no coin of gold hide . Q : excuse I , what be that ? a : they have dog train , they use to take certain woman , tell they to undress completely , and the dog with its tongue would lick they sexual organ of the woman to find if they put any gold coin there . Q : do you know people that this happen to ? a : yes I do .", "the same type , and uh they say very fast , very fast , be always fast , fast , fast , fast . we have to undress completely . and with that undress , I have a wedding band somebody overlook it there and she just put it with she hand out , and it be go . I still think they be german . they be not .", "and uh , they put the name in the book , and maybe those book be now open to we , and uh , they give you the tattoo , and uh then you go to another part in this huge bldg , and uh , there be more of those woman . the same type , and uh they say very fast , very fast , be always fast , fast , fast , fast . we have to undress completely . and with that undress , I have a wedding band somebody overlook it there and she just put it with she hand out , and it be go . I still think they be german .", "they take we in , in a room of 10 , 15 . and in that the room undress , to be undressed . everyone 's undress . I have in front of I a dog tag which I show you before and I be go to show you later on -- a dog tag , which I do get -- which I do get in a labor camp , I be a exceptional . and I do not think of the dog tag .", "she have only a chance , and my mother have only a chance to yell out to I , `` please take care of you sister . '' my name be Cecilie , and this be how she call I , how she call I , how she call out Cecilie , take care of you sister , because she know the pain my sister would sister when she find out where she take she young son . but we really have no time or a chance to reflect yet on the separation because everything be do with such brutality with such scream and yell and right away there be the kapo and block elder who start to beat we into line and the ss with they dog , who be bark and they be train to tear anybody to piece if one do not obey they order , and so we be finally line up , and they march we to a huge bldg which have shower cap and we be tell to undress , and I be always , I be young ------------- , and I dress in my best clothes , my nice coat , my , my best dress , so I put it nicely together when I when I undress , and there come over this kapo , and she fling it to the side , and I say , `` this be my clothes . '' she say , `` yes , but you will not need it anymore , '' and , and I be terribly scared because I do not know what that mean . then when we be undressed , we be order , everybody be order to stand up on a stool , and they shave we , they shave we hair , and the private part , and they look , we could not even recognize each other once we be strip , not only of we clothes , but of we hair .", "but we really have no time or a chance to reflect yet on the separation because everything be do with such brutality with such scream and yell and right away there be the kapo and block elder who start to beat we into line and the ss with they dog , who be bark and they be train to tear anybody to piece if one do not obey they order , and so we be finally line up , and they march we to a huge bldg which have shower cap and we be tell to undress , and I be always , I be young ------------- , and I dress in my best clothes , my nice coat , my , my best dress , so I put it nicely together when I when I undress , and there come over this kapo , and she fling it to the side , and I say , `` this be my clothes . '' she say , `` yes , but you will not need it anymore , '' and , and I be terribly scared because I do not know what that mean . then when we be undressed , we be order , everybody be order to stand up on a stool , and they shave we , they shave we hair , and the private part , and they look , we could not even recognize each other once we be strip , not only of we clothes , but of we hair . then we be shove into those um shower , and they first open the hot water , so we be scald and we , as we run out from under the hot water , we be beat back by the ss and by the Kapos to go under the shower again , and so they open the ice cold water , which have the same effect , and finally we be out of this shower . each of we be give one garment , which of course , do not fit .", "in my case , I will tell you what happen . they take we in , in a room of 10 , 15 . and in that the room undress , to be undressed . everyone 's undress . I have in front of I a dog tag which I show you before and I be go to show you later on -- a dog tag , which I do get -- which I do get in a labor camp , I be a exceptional .", "fast , fast , fast . so we be -- get to a -- to a place -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- where we have to undress . undress completely . we have to stay naked . naked , in row .", "Raus , raus , raus . fast , fast , fast . so we be -- get to a -- to a place -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- where we have to undress . undress completely . we have to stay naked .", "you could not have a pimple on you body . you have to be perfect for work , and then look for the jewel , the vaginal experiment that -- it be -- the hell start right there . we be strip of every , every human trace of behavior . the brutality , the killing , the sicc the dog -- the dog be sicc at the people . they be rip the people apart with the exception of I , I think .", "and that be the last time I see my wonderful mother alive . then we have to form line , and from the line I be on , we be take to a freezing room , and we have all to , in front of soldier with they dog , we have to undress completely . and I try to explain to you that we all come from decent home , and we have never undress in front of stranger . not only because we have to get undressed , but we be check if we be hide thing in we private part . after that long wait , we be give uniform and wooden shoe .", "but meanwhile , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- they do not buy it . it can not be , can not be . so -- but as the time go on , they -- they do not undress so fast . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and they start push with dog , dog . they see -- they see already that there be no other way .", "and I be hit over the head , if I tell you to stay here , then that be what you stay . and that be the last time I see my wonderful mother alive . then we have to form line , and from the line I be on , we be take to a freezing room , and we have all to , in front of soldier with they dog , we have to undress completely . and I try to explain to you that we all come from decent home , and we have never undress in front of stranger . not only because we have to get undressed , but we be check if we be hide thing in we private part .", "again , yell , undress very fast . well , we just look at each other . how can you undress in front of so many stranger ? well , of course , it be no time to ask there any question . in no time , we be undressed ."], "topic_words": [27, "0.317*\"undress\" + 0.222*\"completely\" + 0.061*\"undressed\" + 0.047*\"dog\" + 0.036*\"fast\" + 0.031*\"jump\" + 0.028*\"order\" + 0.019*\"kapo\" + 0.013*\"band\" + 0.013*\"push\""]}, {"texts": ["the middle picture show a area where they -- they strip the corpse of all the clothing , take out any silver or gold filling that they have in they tooth , then they hang those clothes up in a rack there , and they issue they to the other inmate . they never waste any clothing . but they strip all the dead of all clothing before they cremate they . then they have stack of they hang up there in that building . the end picture on the end here be a picture of the confinement area , or the prison area , show the prison barracks , the barb wire fence , and then a path run right along the barb wire fence , and then -- then the moat , a moat fill with water , which surround the camp .", "nothing , just what we have , with 4 dollar , and there be a girl in we compartment on the train , I just want to tell you that because I remember that now , she name be Schecter , and she found a bakery store , in Vienna , and we be all three of we all alone , and we be travel , and suddenly she take out a big roll of money and she say to I do you have money too , and I say no , we take only what they allow we to , four dollar , and she say I take all the money from my father , from my mother , what they give we to survive , and when we get near the border , she take the money and , in Europe the train be different then they be here , each one have a radiator in the compartment , and she take the money and put it in the radiator , and she say as soon as we come out , as soon as we over the border , I take the money out , I hope you do not say anything . naturally not , we be happy we be alive . so when we come to the border , the ss come , that be the black uniform , the top notch , and they tell I , and they tell my wife , you come with we to a different compartment and get strip and to the other girl , I be not listen what they tell she . to I a nazi come and he strip because in my passport be Jew , that I be a jew , I be stand there , just like God make I , just with my stocking on , and I say to he , do you want I to take my stocking off , and he say , no it be not necessary , go ahead , go back . a woman take care of my wife and give she a thorough examination , and she come back after a few minute , but the girl be not in the compartment , so we be sit there , actually I be pray in that time , and then two ss man come in , again , I say to my wife , oh no !", "INT : the left or the right ? fs : well , on the end , it show the furnace . the middle picture show a area where they -- they strip the corpse of all the clothing , take out any silver or gold filling that they have in they tooth , then they hang those clothes up in a rack there , and they issue they to the other inmate . they never waste any clothing . but they strip all the dead of all clothing before they cremate they .", "crew : go ahead . fs : the second row -- there be picture take at the crematorium . and one of the picture on the end be where they have haul the body , strip of clothing , and they be stack there , ready to be put into the furnace . the -- those be prisoner , camp inmate , who pose for these picture and show we how it be do . but they be the one who be compel to handle all the body and put they into the crematorium , where they be then reduce to ash .", "kf : no , because they have be strip . when they be put in concentration camp , they be just strip of the gold in they tooth . they be strip of all , any jewelry . they be strip of any clothing they have . as you will see in one of these picture ... pile of body of clothing that be just put off for trash .", "any remnant of they former life ? kf : no , because they have be strip . when they be put in concentration camp , they be just strip of the gold in they tooth . they be strip of all , any jewelry . they be strip of any clothing they have .", "naturally not , we be happy we be alive . so when we come to the border , the ss come , that be the black uniform , the top notch , and they tell I , and they tell my wife , you come with we to a different compartment and get strip and to the other girl , I be not listen what they tell she . to I a nazi come and he strip because in my passport be Jew , that I be a jew , I be stand there , just like God make I , just with my stocking on , and I say to he , do you want I to take my stocking off , and he say , no it be not necessary , go ahead , go back . a woman take care of my wife and give she a thorough examination , and she come back after a few minute , but the girl be not in the compartment , so we be sit there , actually I be pray in that time , and then two ss man come in , again , I say to my wife , oh no ! and he say to I , do you put money behind the radiator ?", "Q : and you find that out pretty soon after the war end ? a : more about after they end , because I get picture , and -- from people that -- that have bit of piece of -- from either -- I do not know how they have it , do not ask I how , but they -- they somehow obtain some little picture here and there . because we -- we be not able to bring picture or anything , cause you know , when -- when I arrive in Auschwitz , and they be take we to -- they say to shower , and this and that , when they strip we clothes , we -- we think that they be take we to crematorium . but of course , it do not happen , it happen different . so when they take we there , I have with I some picture , and money -- little money , which mean -- mean nothing .", "since we be there -- the Jews -- they think we should get the shot , too . but they want to show the difference between the Germans and the Jews , so they get two shot , we get one shot . -lrb- laughter -rrb- we all have to strip to the waist . I have from my wife a man 's ring , a wide one , and she have make two ring out of it . I be the only guy who be engage to a wife where the wife buy he the ring .", "anything at all ? any remnant of they former life ? kf : no , because they have be strip . when they be put in concentration camp , they be just strip of the gold in they tooth . they be strip of all , any jewelry .", "when they be put in concentration camp , they be just strip of the gold in they tooth . they be strip of all , any jewelry . they be strip of any clothing they have . as you will see in one of these picture ... pile of body of clothing that be just put off for trash . and they be strip of everything and just give a uniform and that be what they have to wear .", "and then -- but you know , I be bring in , I be sit there , and I be pray there be -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- for those , and there be 500 guilder because by -- it be towards the end , and many jewish people do not have money any more . and in the city we have to pay the people something that they could buy the food , you know , and the jewish people be so eager also , collect money from people who do not dare to do dangerous thing , but be willing to contribute , so it be a busy time . and then they -- I -- I be pray to God , I think , oh , this be the end of my life , when I go to prison I have to undress , and they find that , and I will be shoot -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- . and I think of my wedding dress hang at home , and the -- all the expectation we have . and I be pray to God , and plead .", "and they be throw candlestick , and candelabra , and whatever else that be worthwhile in silver . and then they start look for gold . they make my mother undress to remove she girdle . and they stop with that girdle , and they be go over if there be anything hidden , whether dollar be hide there , or some jewelry . I will never forget that experience .", "and I have this ring . and I do not know what to do with it . so be I be naked , completely naked , and they be look in the ear and everywhere . so I -- I -- I have tooth at the time , good tooth . and I -- I somehow break the ring -- and -- and swallow the diamond .", "I be very diligent in my work and I strive to keep the money , to do not spend the money and to do a living , buy a house , you know , in that way . I want , I want to ensure my life and we family 's life , for a good old time life , I mean when we get old . Q : I want to read what Butenaro say about speak out , he say near the end of the silent Holocaust , that he hope he book be a cry to strip away the layer of indifference and guilty silence by just come out and tell one 's story . do you , do you share that at all ? a : as I say , I tell my story for the benefit of the Museum , I like and I appreciate very much how they handle the whole Holocaust problem and everything ."], "topic_words": [28, "0.099*\"strip\" + 0.080*\"picture\" + 0.078*\"end\" + 0.064*\"show\" + 0.053*\"money\" + 0.048*\"gold\" + 0.044*\"clothing\" + 0.039*\"jewelry\" + 0.031*\"life\" + 0.030*\"buy\""]}, {"texts": ["once I go to Berea and talk to the Berea class , and that be the worst . they be just uninterested , sleepy people with a professor who , himself , put I asleep . I just could not blame the student , by that time , they be so turn off , that no matter what I do , I could have strip nude , and it would not have make much of a difference in that class . but the middle-school kid , the junior high , they be just great to talk to . one girl ... just yesterday , I be speak to a class , and one little girl stay behind , and I usually spend about a hour and a half with they .", "once I go to Berea and talk to the Berea class , and that be the worst . they be just uninterested , sleepy people with a professor who , himself , put I asleep . I just could not blame the student , by that time , they be so turn off , that no matter what I do , I could have strip nude , and it would not have make much of a difference in that class . but the middle-school kid , the junior high , they be just great to talk to . one girl ... just yesterday , I be speak to a class , and one little girl stay behind , and I usually spend about a hour and a half with they .", "my only interest in those papers be the Sunday funny , and the daily funny as well . my brother Harry and I be crazy about the cartoon , because we be bo-both have art talent . and part of the art talent we have come from copy the cartoon from the newspaper strip , which be teach to we by we father . Q : really ? a : oh yes .", "so , we use to be in a quarantine and every Sunday people from the city learn about it and they come to we be in with big fence but people go through the fence and they talk and they ask we question and they speak very well english and german , so one couple come to the and they see I and they say we be surround around three way with water . it be a lake , and you could swim but naked . the boy find out that these girl be swim naked so they come to see we naked there and so a couple come , a young couple , she be in the forty maybe forty and she look and she say would you like to be free and go out from the quarantine , and I say of course I would . so , she say I can make you a passport and you can get out . I be go to be you foster mother and we can adopt you so she do .", "-lsb- bb -rsb- ... very unpleasant , and er would not talk to we , and er , and the only time , once when -- and this story be about in three different book , tell by three different people -lsb- mumble , laugh -rsb- , I get to know , very slightly , er , two french Jews , who come from , both of they lawyer , they come from Toulouse . one could speak just a little bit of English maybe understand , but it be difficult , and erm , I think the second , the second day i actually speak to they , he come in and he have , under he uniform , he jacket he have a , a old , torn jersey , and all this bit miss in the front of here , and I remember at the barracks , I have a piece of knit material about that size , and I think that would do then fine , it will fit nicely over there . I try to explain to he when I see he the next day , what it be for , and they be please to have it , and I say ` if you know anyone who can knit , you can strip it all down and knit it all up ' . but anyway , the follow morning , he brother come in on he own , and er , I ask he where he brother be , he say -- I do not know what he say but I find out afterwards -- he be tell I he be in a box about two foot square , about two foot high , and they have to spend the day in there . the Capo , he would put it through the Germans when they get back that they would get this bit of material , -lsb- MUMBLES -rsb- , and er , I think well I will see he the follow day when I come back , but unfortunately that day I would get move onto another job and I never see they again .", "it be , you know , with wire , the electric wire , you know . what be they do ? that woman naked . and he say what be you talk about ? they be crazy , the woman .", "as we be march down in Hamburg , we encounter a group of french prisoner who be they prisoner of war . but they be still get package through the Red Cross . but when they see we half naked , starve , woman , they start to take off they jacket , they scarf , they sweater , and start to throw it to we . so in a day or two , we start to like half like prisoner and half -- I mean french prisoner because we have they jacket and they hat . later , they make a underground passage because the building in which we be house be halfway under water .", "I see these -- these concrete column connect with barb wire fence . on the top of each column there be a light . and inside where I be stand , you know , by the platform , I see woman inside who be -- who be -- they hair be -- be strip , and they be in rag . and they come , you know , they have see we , to beg for food . and I think , at my first thought , that this must be the -- maybe a mental asylum or something .", "for example , there be one -- well I will tell you about that one because it almost cause we death . also the reason she call my mother into another room be because this lady also make doll which be fully clothe adult doll but they be apparently anatomically correct . so she show this lovely doll but then invite my mother into this next room so that she could undress this male doll and show my mother that it have all its anatomical part . well , while my mother and this lady be out of the room I turn and look at the wall behind I on which hang a picture that this woman have also make . the picture be of a sort of cottage and a yard fill with chicken and there be flower against the cottage and there be little window with shutter and a door and so forth .", "do not show you be sick , '' but we have a under , next , next bed under I , next bed under there be a little room here . there be a woman , a french woman , a christian woman , but she husband be jewish and she give birth there , a little girl . the jewish doctor help she to give birth , but when I arrive the baby be already bear , and the baby have no clothing , nothing , and I know how to sew and the mother give some piece of thing , and I make the hat and I make , you know the little hat , and I make the little shirt for she , she be naked , the baby be naked . just cover with the blanket and the baby be cry , there be so much bed bug , you can not sleep at night . you put down you head , you put down you head , you bed bug , you can , you can , eat you up .", "there be these lime shaft and we have to dig lime shaft . and God punish we on top of it . it be a severe winter of ' 45 , this be April ' 45 , and we be just stand there naked and barefoot with -- and deep -- deep shaft . and we have to dig out -- there be -- there be these rail car on top and there be different level and we have to load lime or -- or -- or -- this be just a tortuous thing . and from there to Dachau and from Dachau on the way to the Tyrols , there be specific order by Himmler to be shoot , all these inmate .", "for about three month we have to be there because people use to get sick and a lot of they die , a lot . so , we use to be in a quarantine and every Sunday people from the city learn about it and they come to we be in with big fence but people go through the fence and they talk and they ask we question and they speak very well english and german , so one couple come to the and they see I and they say we be surround around three way with water . it be a lake , and you could swim but naked . the boy find out that these girl be swim naked so they come to see we naked there and so a couple come , a young couple , she be in the forty maybe forty and she look and she say would you like to be free and go out from the quarantine , and I say of course I would . so , she say I can make you a passport and you can get out .", "and since we get in there some of the prisoner come up and pretty soon they start tell -- and in English , a few of they speak English , and -- or it be relay through some of the guy that -- we have one guy in we group that speak -- Ben Sharf -lrb- ph -rrb- be a ger -- speak german real well . and so he say , we be in Buchenwald concentration camp . and then they take we in and strip all of we clothes off of we and put we in a shower-like thing , you know , and we come out , we do not know what be go on . and then they shave every hair off of we body and then swab we with something like creosote that set we on fire , you know , and you ben -- you be dance around , jump and si -- cause it be burn , ju-just like it be peel the skin off , you know . and then they bring we down a little fu-further and they start hand we some clothing .", "there be a big sink where we wash ourselves and then you can go toilet there and there be a guy and he have those high boot . a guy ... he be just a short for one week . he have 01:48 : those high , high boot and then Walter look at those boot and he say my gosh , I know ... I be shoemaker ... I know this ... in those boot , you know , there be strip of metal , of good steel . he say maybe we can make a saw out of this . so Walter go and talk to he ... how long you be here .", "a : no , not even shutter . they be more like we venetian blind , but they be on the outside and they be wooden , and you pull they up like that , but so , you can also turn they so that you can kind of peer out . I remember peer out , and that be a recollection I definitely have of carriage go by we window full of dead -- nude , dead body because they have collect they and then just strip they of clothes and be take they someplace . Q : be these horse draw ? a : horse-drawn ."], "topic_words": [29, "0.182*\"make\" + 0.056*\"building\" + 0.049*\"march\" + 0.049*\"speak\" + 0.039*\"turn\" + 0.035*\"talk\" + 0.032*\"wire\" + 0.030*\"half\" + 0.030*\"high\" + 0.025*\"lady\""]}, {"texts": ["one day a week , usually every Friday , we use to go to the shower to be clean and to have we -- we cl-clothing be disinfect . we go to the shower , we take we clothing , man and woman together in the same place , naked . we have about five minute of shower , and 75 minute naked wait for we -- we -- we clothing to come back from the -- I do not know how they use to call , the place where they disinfect they , and then take he back to the camp . Q : and besides friday , what else do you remember about the daily routine ? a : what I remember , twice a day we use to have what they call the appel , or the appelle .", ", '' we be chase into what they call `` the sauna . '' it be not a sauna that you picture , it be a huge place with shower , and they be real shower . we have to totally undress which be very unusual , in Europe in those day people just do not undress in front of stranger , there be man there too who shave we every place and they spray disinfectant on we and they , they hand we this soap that have initial . it say rjf . and rjf mean Rein Juedisch Fett , translate clean jewish Fat .", "we have to eat it one way or the other . one day a week , usually every Friday , we use to go to the shower to be clean and to have we -- we cl-clothing be disinfect . we go to the shower , we take we clothing , man and woman together in the same place , naked . we have about five minute of shower , and 75 minute naked wait for we -- we -- we clothing to come back from the -- I do not know how they use to call , the place where they disinfect they , and then take he back to the camp . Q : and besides friday , what else do you remember about the daily routine ?", "so I be delegate then to round up transportation and take these people out of there to this town of Hillersleben that we have liberate a couple of day before where there be a barracks and a hospital . so I round up about 60 or 70 vehicle and get they load up and get they out of the area back to Hillersleben . and of course , the medical corps go with they , and they put the sick people in the hospital , and the other go into the barracks , but first of all , as soon as we bring they back to Hillersleben , they be so dirty and stinking and filthy that there be nothing that we could do to give they clean clothing , so we have to have they strip they clothing off , and the engineer battalion set up some shower point , and we start move they through the shower -- the first shower that they have have in month and year . and as soon as they get through the shower , of course , they be give towel and soap , and they be so happy to get clean up to little bit , but even through the shower , they could not get rid of the lice that be infested in they hair and in they pubic hair . and so after they finish the shower , we dust they with ddt .", "it be really bitterly cold . and it be rain . and we have to undress completely in one barrack and run out -- leave we clothes where they be , with shoe and everything , run out completely naked to another barrack , where there be shower and -- and where they spray we with -- brush we with some chemical liquid , delouse we . and we have a shower . we be take out of that -- -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- after the shower , out in the cold again , out in the rain , naked .", "we be delouse every once in a while . in the winter time , we have to go to the barrack that have the shower naked . we be chase out naked . we have to come back after a hot shower to the barrack naked . I remember stand in one of the shower at the lousing -- delousing and my cousin I be with , he say to I , my god , look at yourself , just skin and bone .", "it be a big -- tremendous big camp . we be delouse every once in a while . in the winter time , we have to go to the barrack that have the shower naked . we be chase out naked . we have to come back after a hot shower to the barrack naked .", "they also have gas chamber in ravensbr\u00fcck and they send we to take shower quite often and we be always worry that the shower would wind up be gas . EM : do you know about the shower be gas ? LW : I know about it in Auschwitz once I get there because they make we take shower every few day , get undressed and give they we uniform that we wear ; we wear strip uniform . I do not know if they give we back the same one or new one , they all look dirty , they all look the same but they use to make we get undressed and we never know if we get into the shower if it would be water or if it would be gas . so we know about the gas .", "and that be why this be where they bring all we belongings once we be go . and this also be a place of horror . on the two side there be two shower room where the prisoner be bring and take a shower , and then , we -- naked , we be dispose of on -- on the side of the bath house . there be a space -- when we go out , I will show you -- which be a barrack at one time . and then we go in there , and they shave we head , and they spray we with ddt , and then finally , they give we a piece of rag , which be disinfect here .", "we do not have anything . we be just as we be bear . and as we be stand there naked wait for the shower ... these be these portable shower , you know -- again cold , no soap , no towel , nothing . we come there . these young soldier , ss man , come and look at we and say ... one come to she very kindly and say , `` one of we have to shave . ''", "people only work -- the one that work be either in the kitchen , and I be not lucky enough , you know , to be -- to be choose to work in the kitchen , or they work by -- which -- they -- that be call Canada , where they sort out the clothes and all the stuff that be bring in by the -- by the people that arrive on the train , because everybody come with a suitcase of something . an-and some people have valuable still , I mean hidden , like I -- we have hide in one bar of soap , large diamond earring . but we throw away the bar of soap , because when -- when we arrive and they take we to the shower , you know , to be shower and we have to un-undress completely naked and they shave we all over and -- and they say , if every -- you can not have nothing with you -- you have to walk in just completely naked and you will not get back you clothes anyway , so I be afraid to have that cake of soap , so I throw away the soap right there and -- and I -- and I have nothing . but eventually , no they -- they take all these thing and they be look for , you know , for -- for valuable and people have sew in and some have in clothes , sewn in something , you know . so they have people work sort out and -- and finding and also take away the clothes , which be eventually ship to Germany .", "it look big but I , of course after have be in a , confine in a cattle car for three , four day , I mean anything would look bigger . I have never be back there to really realize how big this place be . but we be tell to undress , to leave everything we have . and then they shave we , take all we hair off , send we to the next room where we have a shower , cold shower , no soap , no towel . of course we now know that it be either a shower or the gas .", "in the winter time , we have to go to the barrack that have the shower naked . we be chase out naked . we have to come back after a hot shower to the barrack naked . I remember stand in one of the shower at the lousing -- delousing and my cousin I be with , he say to I , my god , look at yourself , just skin and bone . I say , you be tell I .", "when they really have mass production like at Buchenwald , they have -- at Buchenwald they have a battery of 12 furnace , and each furnace have four rack in it so they could cremate 48 body at one time . and then there be trap door underneath the furnace that the bone would drop down through and there be a grind mill down below that they grind up these bone and sack they for fertilizer . and Buchenwald , what they use to do , they would bring the people in to a room where there be hook all around the wall and tell they to undress , that they have to go in to a shower room and bathe . so they all take off they clothes and hang they on the hook and then they would go into the shower room . and this room be about 30 by 40 foot , and in the ceiling , it look a -- space all over the ceiling , it look like shower head .", "and the minute anybody even dare to get as close as five yard to the wire , they be shoot already . and still , so many time they be -- how you call this -- like flea at the -- at the -- where -- there be flea thing . strip . and flea get it . thus they be -- how do you say -- wait a minute -- let I think ."], "topic_words": [30, "0.362*\"shower\" + 0.110*\"naked\" + 0.077*\"place\" + 0.030*\"minute\" + 0.030*\"huge\" + 0.025*\"sauna\" + 0.025*\"soap\" + 0.021*\"valuable\" + 0.020*\"towel\" + 0.018*\"chase\""]}, {"texts": ["you see , they separate the woman , we , the hungarian woman from the man . we be in two separate room . and we be tell to undress , the four woman . evidently the man be tell to undress too . and then we come into that small chamber from one side and the man come in from the other side .", "Q : in the room that you be wait and that the two woman with the child be push in . be you undress before that ? a : no , we be naked in that room , but we be tell to undress . you see , they separate the woman , we , the hungarian woman from the man . we be in two separate room .", "several drunk ss man arrive . -lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- with some sort of decency -- I do not know what happen -- they separate the man from we . I do not know how much the man have to undress , but we only have to undress to , to the waist . so we stand in a enormous queue , all the woman . some of the child go -- the younger child be with they mother , or so we try to tell the mother what it be all about .", "and we could see one day there be a selection of the man , which mean that the man stand in row naked and be file before the german to be move , to be destroy . at that point , I be 14 . for the first time in my life that I see a naked man . it be indecent , but the implication of what the selection be all about do not hit I at that time , you know , younger man , older man , different type of work . we be tell that the man lager be go to be move and that we , from the Birkenau Lager A , be go to move to Birkenau Lager B , where the man use to be .", "and then there be shout go on and we really do not know what be go on . they separate the man and they separate the woman . and they tell we to undress . I mean , we be the four woman and the man be somewhere else . and we see quite a big crowd of people outside .", "right out , when they , now I do not , it seem to I , in which room ? Q : in the room that you be wait and that the two woman with the child be push in . be you undress before that ? a : no , we be naked in that room , but we be tell to undress . you see , they separate the woman , we , the hungarian woman from the man .", "and the woman , there be religious woman , elderly woman , young girl , and I be a young girl . I never undress myself in front of any one . here I have to march naked in front of a bunch of man . this be all humiliation . this be all make people subhuman .", "the fact when we get to Auschwitz and they undress we and we have to march in front of man . and the woman , there be religious woman , elderly woman , young girl , and I be a young girl . I never undress myself in front of any one . here I have to march naked in front of a bunch of man . this be all humiliation .", "now , how those three woman escape electric wire , I do not know . but they do . they could not find they , and we be punish , 12 hour naked in cold weather , and additional punishment be they take out 4 or 5 and I do not remember how many woman , and in front of all the woman that we stand in a row , you know , they rape in a rape that I have never read or see it , not in a movie and not on the television , and certainly you can say that we have a terrible television with all kind of story . and to see those young woman rape by the man there with stick , and my mother be near I and she take she hand and put on my eye , I should not see for the first time sexual intercourse . I have never see sexual intercourse .", "interviewer : man be do this to -- and woman be there naked ? subject 1 : yeah , all of they . how many man you see run around naked and woman naked till they give you something to cover . subject 2 : when I -- when I come to Auschwitz and I see the woman , you know , I pass through the camp , from the woman camp . they be all separate .", "they do it deliberately and gradually . one step at a time , one humiliation . the fact when we get to Auschwitz and they undress we and we have to march in front of man . and the woman , there be religious woman , elderly woman , young girl , and I be a young girl . I never undress myself in front of any one .", "subject 1 : all the time . subject 2 : we go into the temple , and then we be strip -- subject 1 : strip by the hungarian , you know , woman . we be -- they take you into a -- a separate room , the woman and the man . that be in we own synagogue .", "my father be separate from we when they separate man from woman . and I find myself in a room with many young woman . we be tell to undress . and I find my sister there . and this be Majdanek .", "we be -- they take you into a -- a separate room , the woman and the man . that be in we own synagogue . and that be where they strip you . they take everything valuable away that they find . we be child , and we have golden earring .", "I be sure a lot of woman ... I do not want to explain how the other woman be look when I see they . Q : explain it . a : somebody be naked , and some of they be mentally . absolutely mentally . a : mentally ill ?"], "topic_words": [31, "0.386*\"woman\" + 0.199*\"man\" + 0.123*\"child\" + 0.056*\"separate\" + 0.025*\"young\" + 0.013*\"mind\" + 0.010*\"hungarian\" + 0.008*\"elderly\" + 0.007*\"humiliation\" + 0.007*\"shock\""]}, {"texts": ["do you see you mother at the same time ? I see my mother -- ------------ , but tell it to I as though you do not tell I before . well , uh , my , my father , like I say , my father come , he be stand in line , my mother be on the other side , on the other side of the truck , where at that time , and this be a very painful uh situation for I as a youngster uh because the woman have to undress completely right there where you be stand , on the other side , and the man be on this side . now why at that time , the woman undress there , I have no idea , but this what we do , all the woman have to undress , and the man stand on this side of course , which be the rail , the railroad run through the middle , and there be one side and then this and man , as I remember , face towards the camp , the woman be on the left side and the man be on the right side if you face , or you be march down towards the selection . and I wave to my mother , I could not go over there talk to she , but it be very painful for I to see my mother naked , but , come at that particular time , I be sure everybody feel the same way , and I speak to my father , like I say , I s-because the way I be bring up , you know , we be a home with God , and uh , we be child of God , and my God , and you know and , and I be pretty religious bring up , and what I see at that time change my mind a little bit , and I raise just that question with my father , `` where 's God ?", "I see my mother -- ------------ , but tell it to I as though you do not tell I before . well , uh , my , my father , like I say , my father come , he be stand in line , my mother be on the other side , on the other side of the truck , where at that time , and this be a very painful uh situation for I as a youngster uh because the woman have to undress completely right there where you be stand , on the other side , and the man be on this side . now why at that time , the woman undress there , I have no idea , but this what we do , all the woman have to undress , and the man stand on this side of course , which be the rail , the railroad run through the middle , and there be one side and then this and man , as I remember , face towards the camp , the woman be on the left side and the man be on the right side if you face , or you be march down towards the selection . and I wave to my mother , I could not go over there talk to she , but it be very painful for I to see my mother naked , but , come at that particular time , I be sure everybody feel the same way , and I speak to my father , like I say , I s-because the way I be bring up , you know , we be a home with God , and uh , we be child of God , and my God , and you know and , and I be pretty religious bring up , and what I see at that time change my mind a little bit , and I raise just that question with my father , `` where 's God ? look at what happen here . ''", "well , uh , my , my father , like I say , my father come , he be stand in line , my mother be on the other side , on the other side of the truck , where at that time , and this be a very painful uh situation for I as a youngster uh because the woman have to undress completely right there where you be stand , on the other side , and the man be on this side . now why at that time , the woman undress there , I have no idea , but this what we do , all the woman have to undress , and the man stand on this side of course , which be the rail , the railroad run through the middle , and there be one side and then this and man , as I remember , face towards the camp , the woman be on the left side and the man be on the right side if you face , or you be march down towards the selection . and I wave to my mother , I could not go over there talk to she , but it be very painful for I to see my mother naked , but , come at that particular time , I be sure everybody feel the same way , and I speak to my father , like I say , I s-because the way I be bring up , you know , we be a home with God , and uh , we be child of God , and my God , and you know and , and I be pretty religious bring up , and what I see at that time change my mind a little bit , and I raise just that question with my father , `` where 's God ? look at what happen here . '' and the answer be , `` this be the way God want it , this be the way it be go to be . ''", "and we see a big side light on the ... direct towards we , that ... and on there be stay a very nice look ss man . and we find out later that man be Mengele . and beside he there be some helper -- people with those strip coat ; and with the ... he hand he point to people . and because I be not on he side on the line -- I be the inside line -- he point to I , and come two man . they grab I and put I out from the line , on the right side .", "INT : upon arrival ? fl : upon arrival , everything -- there be nothing left of you own . you be completely strip of everything . INT : do you think a lot about you father ? fl : yes .", "subject 2 : Waving , wave with the beret , wave . you can see it here well , the wave . I have the little strip of film , which show how they -- my brother wave he beret during the liberation . interviewer : and you see the film ? where ?", "there be one water well outside , a pump . that be where we in the morning we able to wash we face . we stand in line half naked in the cold and splash we face . you could not do more than that with a little pump when you have 500 people to go through and here you have to go out to commando , it be call , work commando . Q .", "and then we come into that small chamber from one side and the man come in from the other side . there be two door to that chamber . and so we be naked in that room . and then when they let we out again , they separate . we go to one side and the man go to the other side .", "so on . but , almost immediately we realize that situation be different , because while we be stand in line , we already see ---------------- the previous arrival . those who be assign to work , naked woman , stand in line , and another group on the other side , naked man , it be at that point , extremely demoralizing , and we know that this be not something which be normal , and they be not , most who be , we see naked , be not older people , but they be all the one who be go to go to work , if not to gas , to be gas . it be very , every second be a different thought . everybody think it be something else , and uh , everybody want to believe it be something different , so that uh , we really do not know .", "INT : can you describe the physical layout of Treblinka where you be ? AB : physical layout in Treblinka be you go in with the railroad train . you get out from the railroad train of the undress place . one side be a barrack . on the other side , be a barrack where the -- the woman undress themself .", "he put everybody out because we have like a long , they call a barrack , a long , like , a factory make from brick which the people what they come before we they build themselves -- they make the people build this barracks and there be very primitive -- there be no quarter , nothing . just be , just like to shelter from the rain . so he take everybody out from the barracks with very big reflector , very big light , naked , completely naked and you have to hold you hand up . that mean , you could not have nothing hide , and with very big lamp , look over you and he have a left side and a right side and we never know , which be the good side -- the left side or the right side . they say , people say , between they that when the selection some people what they take it out , they go to go to the crematorium .", "they take we from there . they put we in a barrack . the barrack be not big enough to hold all of we -- still naked . and they make we sit down on the floor in line , like this , one knee to the other , like this -- line , line , line , line . at that night , this -- come that guy , the ss guy , the red one , that we use to call he -lsb- ?", "a : that be the extermination barracks . about two or three week later , I happen to be fortunate to meet Dr. Mengele who be overlook this last transfer where I belong if there be anyone strong enough to be send out . that be the so-called selection where I be stand naked with many hundred other raise my left arm . we have to raise we left arm because that be show whether we rib show under the skin . if we be too thin there be no point in send we out and give we a piece of bread and take we to force labor because we could not stand it .", "subject 2 : I remember stand in line there . we be stand in line , I think for the shower at that time . we be completely naked . and , uh , I see , like , maybe a block away , I see the people be -- I -- I -- I know , as a child , I know it be body . I have no idea --", "MW : No -- nothing . because anything we take to Auschwitz , it be take from we anyway . and when you arrive to Auschwitz , they undress you , be naked , cut you hair . and either you go to one side to live , either you go to the other side , which we do not know . they be one side for life , the other side maybe have a chance to survive ."], "topic_words": [32, "0.193*\"side\" + 0.121*\"line\" + 0.077*\"stand\" + 0.074*\"time\" + 0.062*\"mother\" + 0.048*\"left\" + 0.041*\"face\" + 0.038*\"God\" + 0.029*\"bring\" + 0.027*\"man\""]}, {"texts": ["but , you know , hunger be a devastating weapon . hunger strip you first of you strength , of you dignity , of you pride . hunger also strip you of you identity . hunger also strip you sometimes of the will to fight back and often also of you will to live , to go on . and once you give up , once you do not care , you perish .", "frankly , nobody know about gas ... I mean now it seem strange not to know about it , but I do not think we understand it . we know about crematoria and you know , you do not follow ... develop you idea since we know what happen ... how the person kill in the crematorium ... if he burn . we do not follow the ... the crematoria , that be the place where people be kill , and we do not go further and this incident which I tell you about with people be send naked , that be clearly a case , a instance where people be send to death , but I must say it take a long time until I and I think all the other start to realize that we be condemn to dea ... to die and all pe ... all Jews be condemn to die . for some time we believe the Germans be crazy and just kill people but that everybody be to be kill , that we do not understand . now on a personal note , around this time I once come in front of a mirror , and I see what be call a mussulman .", "hunger be a daily problem face by all the inmate . but , you know , hunger be a devastating weapon . hunger strip you first of you strength , of you dignity , of you pride . hunger also strip you of you identity . hunger also strip you sometimes of the will to fight back and often also of you will to live , to go on .", "hunger strip you first of you strength , of you dignity , of you pride . hunger also strip you of you identity . hunger also strip you sometimes of the will to fight back and often also of you will to live , to go on . and once you give up , once you do not care , you perish . there be nothing to sustain you .", "and also we have to strip all the time , you know ? we have to strip . this be why I do not understand why people want to walk around naked -- all these people in the '60 . for I , to be dress means to be protect . any animal can be naked , but the dress and to be cover means I be different from a wild beast and I be a person .", "this be why I do not understand why people want to walk around naked -- all these people in the '60 . for I , to be dress means to be protect . any animal can be naked , but the dress and to be cover means I be different from a wild beast and I be a person . because we have to walk around naked . and all these german soldier look at we and appraise we .", "it take he two day and a night to die . one of the reason I speak be because I do not want anybody else 's father or , as a matter of fact , I do not want anybody else to die like that , because the cruelty to these people be unimaginable . it be one thing if you just kill somebody , but to reduce human being to nothing , to take away they dignity to this extent , to have a man shiver , naked , half dead in a dog cage , die slowly , be wrong . you know , I have no grave . I have nowhere to go and connect with my father at all .", "for I , to be dress means to be protect . any animal can be naked , but the dress and to be cover means I be different from a wild beast and I be a person . because we have to walk around naked . and all these german soldier look at we and appraise we . and so then we walk , again , five abreast , to the -- to the train .", "when they go without the fighting , they go with dignity . when they fight and they get kill , they try to protect themselves , but not uh like sheep , because be no way to escape , what a child can do when they take close to 60 child on the hill and execute they ? what the woman who can do when they undress they and they ask they to stay on the , on the side of the grave , and they shoot they with machine gun ? what the other people can do ? what the soldier in the , in the uh , uh , uh last winter of the war where they execute they by Gestapo when they be in french country , close to 150 american soldier be execute .", "yes , they parent , they grandparent be involve in all of that , as Mr. Goldhagen say , but this be my statement . I can speak German to a young person , and be happy to speak , and that I know how to address they and speak . but I can not speak to a person who be older than I , or my age , because that -- that language that -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- all of this here , yell , and -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- be only the way to confuse the Jews , and -- and make they -- first strip they from rights , then strip they from anything that they could , be that it be food , and they really -- kill out the intelligentsia first , so we be people that it be not enough left of the intelligentsia , nor enough left of -- in we , to be able to resist , and that be why we do not resist in as many -- more than it should have be . besides , the population be not that open to help we , but they would help the other , you know ? when they kid be take to Germany , and they do not like it , they help the partisan , because they can -- have where to escape .", "you can not resist , when you be naked . do you know what I mean ? it be like take a person , and undress the person and say , `` fight for you life . '' with what ? there be nothing , never .", "how do you fight with bare hand against gun . I mean , they be mighty . they strip you of you dignity before they kill you . when you have no dignity , there be no life . they strip you of whatever you believe in .", "from time to time , they would come . as a matter of fact , whenever they come , we have to hide we weapon , because we be always afraid that they might take it away say that they be a military group , and they need it for themselves . so as much as we welcome they , we be afraid of they , that they might strip we from -- my uncle be afraid that they might take the weapon away from we . but they be there , and there be military action against the german by the partisan . and as I mention , the war be not - be not go that well for they any longer .", "they be make a example of . this be like early spring . it be cold , and they strip they naked and beat they half to death , and put each of they in a dog cage , in the big area where -- the appelplatz , where people would have to line up every morning to be count -- as a example . it take he two day and a night to die . one of the reason I speak be because I do not want anybody else 's father or , as a matter of fact , I do not want anybody else to die like that , because the cruelty to these people be unimaginable .", "they strip you of you dignity before they kill you . when you have no dignity , there be no life . they strip you of whatever you believe in . you be nothing . there be ... how can you fight this ."], "topic_words": [33, "0.253*\"people\" + 0.138*\"kill\" + 0.057*\"die\" + 0.056*\"person\" + 0.050*\"matter\" + 0.040*\"fact\" + 0.027*\"understand\" + 0.025*\"fight\" + 0.023*\"dignity\" + 0.020*\"animal\""]}, {"texts": ["I still hear they in my ear . I have to sort -- I have to assort the clothing . and they -- when these people go through the selection , I have to -- they have to be naked . and I have to assort the clothing from one pile of child 's clothes , one pile of woman 's clothes , one pile of man 's clothes . we have to make bundle .", "Enough this the clothes . you take the clothes off . and when I go to the right side , naked , they throw the Gestapo throw clothes to people who be to get off the left side and throw one shoe small , one piece clothes , nothing you can wear . Q . so after you get in this line , where do they take you ?", "people only work -- the one that work be either in the kitchen , and I be not lucky enough , you know , to be -- to be choose to work in the kitchen , or they work by -- which -- they -- that be call Canada , where they sort out the clothes and all the stuff that be bring in by the -- by the people that arrive on the train , because everybody come with a suitcase of something . an-and some people have valuable still , I mean hidden , like I -- we have hide in one bar of soap , large diamond earring . but we throw away the bar of soap , because when -- when we arrive and they take we to the shower , you know , to be shower and we have to un-undress completely naked and they shave we all over and -- and they say , if every -- you can not have nothing with you -- you have to walk in just completely naked and you will not get back you clothes anyway , so I be afraid to have that cake of soap , so I throw away the soap right there and -- and I -- and I have nothing . but eventually , no they -- they take all these thing and they be look for , you know , for -- for valuable and people have sew in and some have in clothes , sewn in something , you know . so they have people work sort out and -- and finding and also take away the clothes , which be eventually ship to Germany .", "we be speak polish and yiddish or -- or german . you can hear all these language . now , so when we get in and we undress and go through the shower , before go to the shower -- or no , after the shower -- there be this huge -- -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- it look like -- like a pool , but much smaller than -- than -- than a regular pool , a swimming pool . and everybody have to go through there , and it be sort of a white substance . it -- it -- it be some sort of a disinfectant .", "and this unit be call Canada . we be assign to do -- to sort the clothing after people -- you know -- people still do not go to the gas chamber in 1942 , because they be not build . in 1942 , you know , it be already in one barrack the pile of -- of they luggage and the clothing , which we undress . and we -- we job be to sort the clothing , and you know , separate the underwear , panties , and so on , and bundle they neatly in 10 in a package . and then , you know , the other barrack be where we load those package .", "that must have be the middle part of 1943 . and the worst part of it all be not that they be just take away . there be a -lsb- non-english -rsb- , a sort station for clothes in the ghetto where , once they would take the people to Rumbula , which be the place where they would kill 'em -- shoot 'em , they would undress they , or have to undress themselves . and they would bring the clothes back . and the clothes , then , be sort in this sort station in the ghetto .", "we come into Flossenburg iu July -- it be real hot , I think the middle of July . they take off all the clothes . we have to throw away the clothes , naked , you know , like you be bear . you be still in you regular civilian clothes , right ? no , no , no .", "there be this big room with all kind of bundle . they make the people leave the bundle and there be sick people . some of they be lame , but we manage to undress they and put they clothes in those little fish net bag and once they go through the thing , the steam would kill the vermin , and they could go on the other side and find they own clothes . there be one woman who be in a coma , and the Germans keep say , `` throw she out . she be half dead , she be dead . ''", "in these big oven , they be disinfect the clothes . not we clothes , because we never change clothes here . but when they kill the people , then they strip they and , of course , they disinfect they clothes . or , if prisoner from the camp be kill , or -- or have to go away , this be where they bring to disinfect the clothes . by the way , I want you to know that this place be fill with lice .", "right , the belt . while I -- while we be in -- work in Kanada we be not allow to wear what be really -- would be consider civilian clothes . while , the people in camp , in the camp , be not give these strip clothes , not all of they , they be wear strip clothes . they be give the old rag clothes that be take off the body , and give to they and they last until they really fall off and they be full of mud and filth and lice . and then every so often they , they would -- the lice -- the clothes be take away and they be put in the gas chamber to kill the lice , and then of course all the nit be dead but they be all sit in the seam and be still there .", "Q : so he burn the money ? a : we burn the money , it be a lot of they , a big bag and crisp bill on a -- I -- we all encourage he to do it because it be a raid , hey , you be part of -- part of the czar or something like that . so it affect we also , it be confiscate -- I think be -- my dad be very well like , but I think also confiscate because I have to go into a sort of a -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- have to strip naked and nurse be sit there and boy at 15 , I be sort of intimidate . and they decide that I should maybe not continue with -- with school , I should go some sort of a trade . and I think be also a -- also be because my dad be well-to-do .", "and then -- and then my brother and I , and my father , they take we into barracks . and they say -- we be undressed , and we di -- we still do not know what be g -- what be -- what be go to happen to we . and they -- they say everybody 's undress , and then we leave the clothes there , they take the clothes away . and then they bring we those haftle clothes , you know , those striped clothes , you have see the -- the -- the concentration camp . so then we know we be -- we be save , you know , that we be go to go to work camp .", "and take away the clothes . then we have to go . they give you strip clothes . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and then you go through , you know , to little table there . and they give you number on you clothes , on you clothes .", "and they tell they , they do not have time to guess they . on they have a place , the pool , -lsb- INAUDIBLE -rsb- . and they have one guy with a machine gun , and first he tell he , take the clothes , be naked , all the clothes . interviewer 1 : to undress ? SUBJECT : Undress , they have to undress .", "and the people -- some of they be not even shoot fatally . just throw they in the river , and they throw the child live into the river . and they have to be all naked . they take all they clothes off . and they take all the clothes and donate it for the Sudetendeutsche who have to flee the Russians ."], "topic_words": [34, "0.484*\"clothes\" + 0.093*\"sort\" + 0.082*\"throw\" + 0.016*\"leave\" + 0.015*\"bundle\" + 0.013*\"pile\" + 0.012*\"find\" + 0.011*\"bar\" + 0.010*\"meantime\" + 0.010*\"crawl\""]}, {"texts": ["for example , when the sic -- six day war come along in -- in 1967 , be that a -- be than a important event for you ? a : it be extremely important , because we -- we feel -- I feel that they liberate the land that th-the -- that the Arabs feel be they land , but if you go back in history , a lot of it belong to Israel . and even now , the dispute about the Gaza Strip , and other area , you know , that belong to Israel , but Israel be not a state . it be Palestine , and -- there be a conflict , of course , and I hope they -- they will have a peace tre-treaty , and try to live together , and they will be much better off by -- they do not have to love each other , but at least they should co-exist . by co-exist , the Arabs would definitely benefit , and I think even Israel would benefit , have peace , not have to arm itself , and lose people , you know , and -- which be completely a waste of human life .", "I always feel that the selection platform be a focus of a very important of my feeling . it be a little strip of land for -- of about 40 by 150 at its longest and its widest point . and in that little strip of land , more human being be tear -- more family be tear apart than any other place on the face of this earth . and so we leave a plaque there to the memory and we pledge that we would look for the truth . and we light six candle to the memory .", "EK : this be 1985 , when we go back for the 40 year to the liberation . I always feel that the selection platform be a focus of a very important of my feeling . it be a little strip of land for -- of about 40 by 150 at its longest and its widest point . and in that little strip of land , more human being be tear -- more family be tear apart than any other place on the face of this earth . and so we leave a plaque there to the memory and we pledge that we would look for the truth .", "I feel that I belong there because my -- my -- my relative , my mother , my everybody be there . but a ss man with a -- with a cane grab I by my throat and push I to the group where I be count 499 and I have the 500th . now we be march one and a half mile or two mile to a place , a huge building , where we have to undress totally naked . everything what belong to we do not belong anymore to we . and they be scream and beat and torture , lo , lo , lo , lo .", "of course , you know that when they describe torture and thing like this , you -- but -- but the -- the killing be not on the mass level that the thing that we encounter in -- in El Salvador . the -- the thing that -- that stru -- have strike I always in my work in human rights be the different -- that some of the people who commit these act have no -- no s-s -- I do not know , i-it 's not question of conscience , but if we -- j-just to give you a example , we -- we have one man who testify as a witness , have be involve in this , and we ask , be they tortured ? and he say , `` no , they be not tortured , '' but -- and we say , `` well you have this woman standing there for 24 hour naked in this cellar , try to get a confession in front of man . '' `` well , that be not torture . '' y-you know , the different notion of what be torture , if y -- if you do not hit somebody over the head , then it be okay .", "and one of the first thing -- it be right after the war of independence . one of the first thing they do be they teach you how to protect yourself , because it be still at a time where there be shooting go on . we live real -- we live , like , two mile from the border , from the egyptian border , you know , of the Gaza Strip . you could see Gaza on the horizon , you know . it be -- that be how close it be , ok ?", "meanwhile or later , with -- anyhow , when we come to the main square -- the distance between the house and the main square be maybe about three quarter mile , maybe a mile at the most . but the sight between the house and the main square be the most horrendous . that be the real brutal -- naked brutality , as I be force to -- to -- to see en masse , the first time . because , you know , I see shooting here and a shoot -- beat there and all kind of thing I do see , but I do not see so many act of brutality up to that point . we be talk now about 1942 in October .", "the first thing that they strip the professional , jewish people from they profession . they be just treat like dirt , like laborer , like slave . they be strip away from they human dignity . this be the first thing , be to break they spirit . Anthony : so after he leave the ghetto , he be no longer a pharmacist ?", "Anthony : just a prisoner in a uniform ? Lily : no , no . the first thing that they strip the professional , jewish people from they profession . they be just treat like dirt , like laborer , like slave . they be strip away from they human dignity .", "there be no bloodshed or anything . they just come in . in the very begin , I do not know if it be the same day they march in or the next day , all the Jews , right away they zero in on the Jews , we have to meet at the marketplace and right away they start with they decree to strip we of all material possession slowly but very systematically . the first request be for the Jews to give all the gold , maybe all the silver , all the radio , everything that have any material value , carpet , Persian carpet , you would not imagine , fur , fur coat , all sort of thing we have to bring to the marketplace , or whatever , I think it be the marketplace , the Germans take that . and that go on for about a week .", "Q : you mention that you learn some thing on you own and you be successful in -- in you interrogation . and you mention one thing that they do not teach you be to have you prisoner -- a : Strip . Q : -- get undressed , right . what other kind of thing do you improvise ?", "once they enter into that large room and the door be lock , they would let gas in there . now , what the terrible thing be in ... one of the ... one of the lucky thing , in a way , for I ... the terrible thing be they would be dead . of course , they would be stark naked . they would be send we to go and pick up the dead body who they just gas , and ... and cart they up to the crematoria . my ... as I say , lucky for I , be that I be not the one at the time who belong to the Sonderkommando .", "and I feel terrible , ashamed , humiliate . I feel naked . I be naked . and I look around . everybody be bald .", "the whole thing be , they later , they call it the carpet , you know ? in the language , the military language . they rush over a special strip , and one after another , and let the bomb fall . they call it `` they lay a carpet . '' and you could see it later .", "those three man , you imagine the feeling that we have ? we be so nebbesh -lsb- helpless -rsb- for the other , but we feel good ... ashamed to tell you , but it be like this . we could cool we body on the wet window , the window be wet from the heat , and the wetness feel good on we naked chest . and we have to sew on those Mogen Dovids on the prisoner ' clothing and the number . everybody on the floor , one after the other , have to sit up , have to take off the jacket , have to give it to we ."], "topic_words": [35, "0.292*\"thing\" + 0.088*\"feel\" + 0.041*\"imagine\" + 0.029*\"human\" + 0.028*\"eye\" + 0.026*\"point\" + 0.022*\"mention\" + 0.021*\"real\" + 0.019*\"feeling\" + 0.019*\"mile\""]}, {"texts": ["yes , it always be -- there be a awful smell there . it be horrible all the time , but what I remember be wait in line naked . stand outside naked wait on line to get into the shower and sometimes we would stand out there for many hour it seem and somehow I remember that be scary , because I do not know now , but I know that sometimes you do not get you clothes at the end of this shower and you be not go to be able to come back . but again , be probably silly child , at one time I have a locket from my mother that I wear around my neck and I know that when we undress for the shower if anybody see this , it would be real trouble , but I be brazen enough to think that I could actually get away with hide this in my hand , so I do remember take it off my neck and hold it very tightly in my hand to get into the shower and I probably lose it then right in the shower because -- do not come out with it but I remember it be a act of defiance on my part . I say `` I can do this . ''", "I : I just remember something that for year , even today sometimes that besides you -- you know , you just say the smell . yes , it always be -- there be a awful smell there . it be horrible all the time , but what I remember be wait in line naked . stand outside naked wait on line to get into the shower and sometimes we would stand out there for many hour it seem and somehow I remember that be scary , because I do not know now , but I know that sometimes you do not get you clothes at the end of this shower and you be not go to be able to come back . but again , be probably silly child , at one time I have a locket from my mother that I wear around my neck and I know that when we undress for the shower if anybody see this , it would be real trouble , but I be brazen enough to think that I could actually get away with hide this in my hand , so I do remember take it off my neck and hold it very tightly in my hand to get into the shower and I probably lose it then right in the shower because -- do not come out with it but I remember it be a act of defiance on my part .", "it be horrible all the time , but what I remember be wait in line naked . stand outside naked wait on line to get into the shower and sometimes we would stand out there for many hour it seem and somehow I remember that be scary , because I do not know now , but I know that sometimes you do not get you clothes at the end of this shower and you be not go to be able to come back . but again , be probably silly child , at one time I have a locket from my mother that I wear around my neck and I know that when we undress for the shower if anybody see this , it would be real trouble , but I be brazen enough to think that I could actually get away with hide this in my hand , so I do remember take it off my neck and hold it very tightly in my hand to get into the shower and I probably lose it then right in the shower because -- do not come out with it but I remember it be a act of defiance on my part . I say `` I can do this . '' I do .", "that smell like shit ? smell like dead dog , dead -- he say , no , it smell kind of bad , but I do not smell that smell . I say , well , it be kind of -- so I hang it out on the fence there by the -- by the strip , and the next day i go out there and be go to have my uniform press . we have some german woman that we pay they with coffee or something and they would press we uniform for we . and , um -- I still smell -- I say , Louis , do you smell this ?", "we say let 's not give anything to they . but I forget that I have long hair and I forget that I have my earring with my monogram in my ear and my hair cover it , so it go through , but everything go and we be naked . the man , they take separate and they undress the man naked and they leave they only the strap in the hand and they tell they to hold the strap in they hand and they let german shepherd after they . and you know , when you have something in the hand and the german Shepherds go wild and they be bite out piece of meat of the people . this be the beginning of Maidanek .", "I : well , we do have some stuff but ... I ... this be ... I ... the only thing I recall be that I have a locket . I have a locket that I ... a heart , and I remember have that for a long time even when I arrive in Auschwitz and I be very brazen . we would stand on line for the shower and we would have to strip naked and I have enough presence of mind to know that I have to take this thing off and I would hold on to it . I do not know how I do it , but I do it . I lose the locket however , somewhere .", "we be sit on it so we put everything there . we say let 's not give anything to they . but I forget that I have long hair and I forget that I have my earring with my monogram in my ear and my hair cover it , so it go through , but everything go and we be naked . the man , they take separate and they undress the man naked and they leave they only the strap in the hand and they tell they to hold the strap in they hand and they let german shepherd after they . and you know , when you have something in the hand and the german Shepherds go wild and they be bite out piece of meat of the people .", "she be 139 . she have they on naked little foot . and be nearly naked , and I grab she underneath I and hold she to myself like this , and want to go out . they grab I all . they hold I .", "so we go in the other room . and a few minute later , the man come in , not woman . everybody be naked . -lsb- background noise -rsb- and the man come in , they tell we to spread we leg , to spread we hand , they shave we wherever there be a hair on we body . they shave we .", "Q : do you remember you reunion , where you , you have a big smile on you face . a : oh yes , it be a very pleasant thing because you know , the nicest thing that have , anybody have do for I through the war and you know at the end of the war be this little birthday book . and the only way that I be able to save that , because you know , we be stark naked all the time so we could not save anything , but this be just nine day before the war and I must have learn from my mother to hide my bread , she hide the bread near the bosom and for those nine day I keep that there and somehow it be not find . so right now it be in the , in a museum , Holocaust museum in Houston , on display . Q : be you in touch with these two woman now ?", "I use to get a piece of bread , usually int he morning , with some black stuff to drink and I remember that I would always , since I be always -- maybe it be in the afternoon -- because I be always hungriest in the morning so I think it would be really clever for I to try to save this piece of bread so I would have it the next day and of course it usually be go and I do not understand it but now in retrospect I think the rat and mouse at Auschwitz must have love I . they know who to come to . I remember stand in line , humiliate standing outside in the cold naked wait to get into the shower and also terribly scared because somehow I know that you do not always come out of the shower . I do not know quite what happen , but I know you do not always come back . I be amaze at my , I guess call it chutzpa , because I have a locket on my neck , a gold locket from my mom and I be determine to hang on to this and of course if they have see it , I do not know what would happen to I , but I take it off my neck and hold on to in my hand and somehow get pass the guard .", "so even , it be November , it be cold . in Poland November be pretty cold . we have to undress almost completely . I remember he be turn off the heel of my boot to see if I do not hide there anything because many Poles hide they belongings , they money . and he be , you know , they be , he have the long whip in he hand and he be , you know , go through my body with that whip and he order I to , to stand with my leg spread out .", "Q : Right . a : but , if I have not see it , in my mind I still see it , with the thumbtack with a little bit of flesh on it , on one of the tack . and the handle be only about that big , and strip of leather about that big and they would just whip the prisoner with it . and I have the flag and I have the , you know , the bayonet I bring home , I do not know what happen to that . remember the bayonet ?", "a : no . Q : No . so you be very careful how you dress and undress -- a : careful how I dress and undress and all that , and do not forget I -- we never -- we never base -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- always have this -- you know there be just a -- just you wash you -- th-the lower part of you body do not get much -- much sanitation as it be , you know . you just wash the upper body , the foot or leg and this and that , so -- so I never -- th-there -- there be no -- there be no shower , you know , and then --", "Q : No . so you be very careful how you dress and undress -- a : careful how I dress and undress and all that , and do not forget I -- we never -- we never base -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- always have this -- you know there be just a -- just you wash you -- th-the lower part of you body do not get much -- much sanitation as it be , you know . you just wash the upper body , the foot or leg and this and that , so -- so I never -- th-there -- there be no -- there be no shower , you know , and then -- Q : right , right ."], "topic_words": [36, "0.114*\"hand\" + 0.102*\"remember\" + 0.064*\"hold\" + 0.064*\"part\" + 0.057*\"hide\" + 0.046*\"lose\" + 0.036*\"forget\" + 0.035*\"grab\" + 0.032*\"leg\" + 0.026*\"smell\""]}, {"texts": ["they give we shower over there . of course , they cut we hair . Cut everything , you know , undress completely , cut everything . go under the shower and then they give we a new number because the Auschwitz number , the tattoo number be no good for Buchenwald . so , they give we a new number , and we have to go by the number now because nobody have a name .", "and we arrive at Buchenwald , after two and a half day , almost three day . in Buchenwald , naturally , we be take from the station and bus -- not on bus -- on -- on truck into the Camp Buchenwald . and there , we be again strip from head to toe , shaven from head -- all over , from head to toe , shaven . and then we have to go and take a shower . and then you have to go through a line where you would get you nice gray and blue uniform , the prisoner 's uniform .", "my head -- not my head -- they shave the head of the other girl , and by some , I do not know , miracle , or a -- I can not explain today -- they -- there be those that get out with with they hair . my head be not shave . we be humiliate be naked in front of these strange man . and what -- I remember , which I find out later on , that this be Mengele . he stand there in front , with other german .", "PS : ... of Naz - ... pb : Cut all they woman 's hair off . now , the French would get a hold of the woman as we would capture they , and they would take they and undress they and cut all they hair off . PS : do you see any ... pb : and put they in the street .", "after the crew cut , they -- the guard attempt to shave we -- shave a 2-inch strip from front to back on the head . and evidently , this be design so to keep we from be able to flee from the concentration camp . as the guard be shave that 2-inch inch strip from front to back , they would spit on we head to make that shave process possible . sometimes before , while we be still at Oskar Schindler 's factory , we do receive a tattoo . the tattoo be not a number , but it be a big kl .", "I think I be first , and we get consecutive number and from then on we have no name , just number , and then we go to the bath house . we -- as I say they take away we clothes . 02:23:05 we have to strip . everybody be shave . I do not know by what miracle Pepi and I be not shave .", "Q : oh , you have to strip and then what ? a : and then they -- they take away everything and I think they give we the clothing which be striped , you see the concentration camp . I think they also cut we hair and have a l\u00e4usestrasse , as you know , he cut you like the Marine Corps , but the middle one be sort of a strip they call the l\u00e4usestrasse , which be -- in german mean the street for lice , but you -- like prisoner , you know , be just a big strip in -- in the middle and assign we number . i-i lose my name . Q : do they give you a tattoo ?", "then they say , bend down . and they cut we -- cut we hair . so we feel like -- like naked without we hair . and they cut you at you vagina , all the hair , and even under you arm . so then they say , ok .", "but then the question be , once you escape , a tattooed number on the arm and uh hair shear . in other word , you look like a prisoner . and blue/white strip uniform that you could throw away if you have other clothes , but you still look like a prisoner with no hair and look like a skeleton , you be immediately recognize , so where you go to go . so even if you have a chance to escape , and the chance be there frankly , at the place of work , in , in the synthetic gasoline factory . there be many chance .", "en : well , we -- I have to tell you first what happen during this disinfection . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- in this , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- what I say bath , or shower , or de-lousing station , everything that connect we with the past be lose . we be strip to we skin , and we be shave from head to toe . all we top hair , all we pubic hair , everything be shave , down to the toe . we have to undergo rectal examination because they suspect that we have some gold or jewelry hide there .", "INT : how do you find out what be happen at Auschwitz ? pb : well , we do not find out for the longest time . we , we be march to a barracks , and then we be tell to undress . and the first person go to one room , and the person first cut we hair off , first with the scissor . and then we go to the next room , and then they shave we all , both we hair and under the arm and the pubic hair , everyplace .", "you come in , the Drs use to look you over at that time , remember this be the beginning of Auschwitz at that particular time . Dachau exist much longer , uh , the camp , but Auschwitz just begin , as much as I understand when I come in . uh , the uh , you have to undress , they shave you hair , they give you the striped uh , uh pants , and at that particular time also , people use to have , they do not cut they both side , they cut just in the middle , just the middle hair , use to be cut off , and you could not escape , because they always , they recognize you , and of course you get the number . and uh right away you , of course , you know you start work the way , whatever they want you to do , that be what you do . mainly build stuff and all this kind of thing .", "and there we be in Gross-Rosen itself . once we come out of the shower , we face a battery of -- of guard who be give we a crew cut . after the crew cut , they -- the guard attempt to shave we -- shave a 2-inch strip from front to back on the head . and evidently , this be design so to keep we from be able to flee from the concentration camp . as the guard be shave that 2-inch inch strip from front to back , they would spit on we head to make that shave process possible .", "Q : what have happen to you hair ? a : well , we hair be shave , or clip . and in the middle of a he -- from the front to the back , there be a inch and a half strip that be all shave every week and they -- we use to call it Adolf Hitlerstrasser . if you escape from a camp , people could recognize it , you be a inmate . Q : when you be recover , be there food that you really want , but you be not able to have ?", "when we arrive at the showering process and delousing as they would call it , we go through a room whereby we head be -- we be give a crew cut and the Germans or the ukrainian guard at that time would spit on we head to give they the ability to shave a stripe from front to back so it would wind up like a one to two inch stripe run through a otherwise crew cut , there would be a shave strip . I suppose that this be do so that we would not be able to escape . so in the Gross-Rosen camp , we receive this crew cut and a shave strip through the middle , run from front to back of the head . the situation inside the Gross-Rosen camp , as I describe before , whenever there be a chance for the ukrainian guard to kick anyone , they enjoy that . I do not recall any killing or hanging inside that camp ."], "topic_words": [37, "0.191*\"hair\" + 0.167*\"shave\" + 0.147*\"head\" + 0.103*\"number\" + 0.086*\"cut\" + 0.030*\"tattoo\" + 0.022*\"Buchenwald\" + 0.021*\"recognize\" + 0.017*\"men\" + 0.016*\"chance\""]}, {"texts": ["Q : Stripped , striped suit like prison suit ? a : Yah . they come from you know and then you get it of course , you know , one shirt which be full of lice , you know , there be always the lice but you know you get a strip suit . you be always to wear a strip suit . Q : so if you run away you would easily be identify by the striped suit ?", "he wear a yellow armband with black lettering on which be it say , - -- elderstedt , and then there be some other , you know , prisoner in striped uniform with armband . some have block elderstedt which mean block senior , and we be march to the shower . there we have to undress and we be shave all over we body include we head , and then we have to go into a tank which be full of some chemical , disinfectant , we have to submerge in it , and then from there we go to the shower and we have to wash , and when we come out of the shower , we have to put we civilian clothes , because when we come from the prison we be still in civilian clothes . we have to -- it be pack in a bag , in a paper bag with we number . of course , we do not have the number then but after the shower then we be issue prison uniform .", "they give we , issue we a striped brown cap , a jacket , a striped jacket , a pair of striped trousers , a pair of wooden clog , and a shirt . no sock or underwear . then the last area , when they give we the uniform , they give we two strip of cloth . the cloth I would say be about six inch long , maybe inch and a half wide . and it would star , star with the star of David , correspond with the number on you left forearm , sew on you left breast and on the right pant leg .", "we have to -- it be pack in a bag , in a paper bag with we number . of course , we do not have the number then but after the shower then we be issue prison uniform . we get long underwear , striped , you know , blue and white stripe but very , very narrow underwear , and then we receive striped , one-inch white striped , white and blue trousers and jacket and a cap , also strip . then we be issue to swatch of white cloth with a number . my number be 13390 and two red triangle .", "and we have already have we bath . then we have to go through a disinfectant , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- a disinfect block , where they put a painting brush in the bucket of disinfectant , and the whole body be paint with this disinfect liquid . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and still march around naked into a block where you be give clothing , the striped clothing of the prisoner . they just look at you . they do not say , what size be you , anything like this .", "a : Yah . they come from you know and then you get it of course , you know , one shirt which be full of lice , you know , there be always the lice but you know you get a strip suit . you be always to wear a strip suit . Q : so if you run away you would easily be identify by the striped suit ? a : no , you could not run away .", "because from Auschwitz you be send to different camp . Q : who provide you with thing like clothing ? a : Clothing come from Dachau you know the strip , the strip suit . Came from Dachau to Auschwitz . Q : Stripped , striped suit like prison suit ?", "my father tell I to say that I be 18 although I be only about 16 and my profession be a gardener . the scream and tormentation from separation of family be the first really awful thing I experience in my life . they then take we to Bircanau where they be strip of everything which we be glad to get rid of . however , we do not get a shower and then we be give striped clothing or civilian clothing with red stripe paint on it . we head be shave , and we be tattoo .", "ms : on the clothing , yeah . INT : what do the uniform look like ? ms : it be a prison strip blue and white . it be winter and they do not have enough prison uniform . in Dachau they have summer uniform and winter uniform .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- so we have to -- we be not allow to be in the street . and now if we have to go in the street , they issue that every jew have to wear a armband with a star of David . so from sheet , we cut out strip , and we be sew and embroider like a little star of David . we be afraid to walk the street . it be full of military , and they occupy .", "at the time we go there , I believe there be three of we nurse and the chief nurse , she go there for some reason , we go along with she , and we happen to be at the time that they be -- that the Americans have this camp , they be issue clothing to the inmate . there again they have they striped uniform . I suppose because they be issue -- we be issue -- the Americans be issue clothing , there come the man sort of in a column come in to get they clothing , and they be stark naked , not a stitch on they . they come in where we -- three or four woman be , and they smile , and they act as if they be clothe , _____ + clothes . and we have to look at they as if they be clothe , smile at they and , of course , we do not speak German , they do not speak English but , you know , the -- probably some handling which -- you know , all that -- as if nothing have happen , and we be tell that these be political prisoner ; that some of the best mind in Germany be probably there , but they be not politically correct , and yet what grab my attention be that these man do not seem to be aware -- of course they be aware they do not have clothes on , but they do not seem somehow to acknowledge that .", "the dutch people and a few of the other be be hold more as hostage for exchange purpose with the Americans for some of the german prisoner that we be hold . so they be in fairly good condition and clothing be fairly good , but for the most part , they clothes be very ragged . they be not in the strip prison uniform that you often see in picture . they be in they own civilian clothing , but they have wear these clothes for month and month and month without any possibility of repair . if they get a tear in the clothing , that be it .", "after that they ... they bring we in a place where they give we these uniform . Yah ? the strip prisoner uniform . then we know what it be , and nothing else . all we ... clothing , civil clothing and everything be go .", "they spray we with ddt , with pesticide . and then we walk through a door where two prisoner greet we . one give we a recycled dress , which we put on we naked body . and another prison have a bucket of yellow paint and a brush about four inch wide and paint a yellow streak from the top of we shave head down to we back . this be the identification of be a jewish prisoner and that be how we enter the campsite .", "we get that , but like I say , you know , we have it on , uniform , the first day we arrive in Auschwitz , they -- they change . they take all -- everything we have , civilian clothes and throw it in one box . and then they tell we to go outside and we stay there naked til they call and -- and give you they uniform , striped uniform . Q : and with these uniform you come to Warsaw ? a : yes ."], "topic_words": [38, "0.202*\"give\" + 0.145*\"uniform\" + 0.110*\"clothing\" + 0.053*\"striped\" + 0.040*\"wear\" + 0.037*\"prison\" + 0.030*\"suit\" + 0.024*\"civilian\" + 0.022*\"underwear\" + 0.021*\"red\""]}, {"texts": ["a shower be just drip , drip of cold water -- just every here a -- here and there a drip of water . I would not mind the cold water if it will be water , but a drip here and a drip there be absolutely unbearable . then , of course , they take we -- naked -- to have we hair cut . and there be hungarian woman who work with the Germans there . and be naked , no matter under what circumstance , even in Auschwitz , you do feel embarrassed .", "no , I mean , he be -- he -- as I say , he be very nice . and then he wife -- it be -- the place be so cold -- they do not heat the upstairs , the water freeze in the water picture . I would get undress under the cover , and then in the morning I would take all my clothes , put they under the cover , warm they up and get dress again . it be terribly cold there beca -- why ? because they do not heat they upstairs .", "we do not go in right away . my mother get in and take water . and we wash on the outside , strip and wash on the outside , even though it be cold . and then when we get in , she warm the water . we wash , and put out we clothes to freeze , because it be winter .", "and by about 8:00 pm or 9:00 pm , under four hour stand in the bitter cold , we get into the -- into the disinfection room , which be just a concrete -- concrete floor , basically , with six water , you know , thing run . and take everything off , of course , usually . just -- just before I get to the room , to we amazement , we could see the people who come out on the other side of the -- of the shower room -- naked , of course . they come out naked , and hot -- hot , steamy body . and there be a group of people who be stand there for hour and hour outside , naked , with they hot body .", "after the guard go out from she backyard , she call I into the house . I walk into the house , she have , a tub of water , hot water . she tell I to strip , she put I in the hot tub of water . she shave I , my hair off , lice be that big on my body . she clean I up , wash I up .", "there be no privacy . and if they think you do not wash yourself good enough they come with the big spray hose and spray ice cold water over you , midwinter , and it be cold . Q : people be naked , no clothes on ! a : no , you have to take everything off . it be in the morning .", "they be develop a lot better . they be pretty woman and apparently they make some medical experiment , because through one window we peek and we see some man naked in big tub . they be metal tub , with ice and they would freeze they to a certain temperature and they would let the woman undress and I guess they want to see the sexual reaction and this be horrible to watch and pretty soon it be the turn for we . -lrb- pause -rrb- -lrb- cry -rrb- this be when you . -lrb- pause -rrb- and if you do not do what they want you to do , you will be beat up something terrible , or you be put under cold shower .", "that be the bad part . in the Shellneetsa camp , there be a little brook run through , so people would go and wash themselves , even in the winter . men would undress and wash they body in the win -- but in Mioufka , there be -- you have to scrounge to get a -- a basin of water and everybody would wash up at the same time , you know . it be -- lice -- lice be -- i-i-it w -- it be a plague of lice that be even maybe not as bad as in Auschwitz , but it be very bad . those be the two major thing , hunger and lice .", "and we have the shower and we have hot water system . but when the move start from we home to a jewish house , all this stop . and , and sometimes I be have not a bath , but have a dish full of water and wash myself and a lady , half naked , one of the mother , like , she be have a wash next to I in another dish . so the , the the -- the drop of live standard , it be -- it immediately arise . and from then on , I know I be a jew .", "just -- just before I get to the room , to we amazement , we could see the people who come out on the other side of the -- of the shower room -- naked , of course . they come out naked , and hot -- hot , steamy body . and there be a group of people who be stand there for hour and hour outside , naked , with they hot body . and gradually , they fall down , and freeze to death . and so we think this -- this look pretty grim , because we get we shower , then we have to stand outside in minus 20 with -- with steam hot body .", "and that building with the chalk kind of interested I because sometimes I would hear scream and I would see german soldier take woman there , woman that be maybe at that time maybe in they twenty or maybe older . they be develop a lot better . they be pretty woman and apparently they make some medical experiment , because through one window we peek and we see some man naked in big tub . they be metal tub , with ice and they would freeze they to a certain temperature and they would let the woman undress and I guess they want to see the sexual reaction and this be horrible to watch and pretty soon it be the turn for we . -lrb- pause -rrb- -lrb- cry -rrb- this be when you .", "I be all wet and I wash myself . around the barrack there be wall with water pipe . it be the middle of winter but I undress and give myself a douche . I go to barrack with wet clothes but many time that night I have to wash again . I be sure I be go to die .", "and we be over there . he do , you know , some selection while we be count the roll call in the morning . this be not , you know -- it sound better than it be , because this be simply torture , to be almost naked . October , November -- it be bitter cold . and we have to be naked , strip , only the wooden shoe on we foot .", "it be a special barrack with shower in they , and then you all go in there and you get a shower . it be pretty hot , nice and warm , and you get one towel for three people , and then let you dry outside . you go outside naked and you have to dry yourself -- if you be number three you get a wet towel . in the winter it be not too nice . but it be one of the thing to make you feel real small , to bring you down .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- she use to take , you know , the people , take a iron brush and take the chemical that you wash the -- the -- the -- the ammunition , you wash in a special solution . they be so terrible , bad , that when you work only with it , the fume make you sick , make you have the whole hand sick with rash , everything . and they -- she use to wash they , take they naked , in front of everyone , wash those people . INT : what people ? dn : the -- we -- we inmate , they wash it ."], "topic_words": [39, "0.160*\"cold\" + 0.156*\"water\" + 0.079*\"wash\" + 0.066*\"winter\" + 0.065*\"hot\" + 0.026*\"warm\" + 0.026*\"pretty\" + 0.022*\"morning\" + 0.020*\"wet\" + 0.019*\"freeze\""]}, {"texts": ["and it have big spool -- what be that , about a foot ? and behind my machine -- oh , the -- this five-meter long machine have I do not know how many dozen of these big spool -- and they be feed from behind my machine from big bin . there be strip of cotton about -- what be that , four inch , five inch wide -- and half a inch thick . and they go through a -- a row of needle , and evidently those needle divide that -- that strip of cotton . and so then , by the time I see the cotton , it come in a very thick thread , I would say , about like my finger .", "and behind my machine -- oh , the -- this five-meter long machine have I do not know how many dozen of these big spool -- and they be feed from behind my machine from big bin . there be strip of cotton about -- what be that , four inch , five inch wide -- and half a inch thick . and they go through a -- a row of needle , and evidently those needle divide that -- that strip of cotton . and so then , by the time I see the cotton , it come in a very thick thread , I would say , about like my finger . and the spool be wind it up .", "and he rattle off on this old bike , and th -- and -- and by that time , I al-always keep on talk about rattle bike . you see , we do not have any air tire any more . tire be make then either out of wooden strip , very cleverly , wound around with steel wire around the rim , or if you be a little bit better , old car tire be strip , the rubber -- solid rubber be then wind around , and so -- but you can imagine , within about a month , everything rattle loose on you bike , so they always rattle . anyway , my father set off , and he go to Barnfeld , and as he -- and now I will have to quote he , because he tell this later , also in the interview , he -- he -- he reach Barnfeld , and he go there into a building , and behind a rickety table , he find three older -- older man , yeah , three older , jewish man , and the -- and they say , `` can we help you ? '' and as -- he say , `` yes , '' he say , and -- and I be try to express this as na\u00efve as we be still .", "I do that and I miss . it be enough you miss one -- the key do not fit . she come the next thing to the place and she have such a leather -- every german be walk with such a leather strip -- strap . and she strap with it , hit I over -- straight over my face and throw the key and tell I , you better make that key fit or else you will pay with you life . so of course , I be help at that point and double check that the key should fit and all that .", "it be just airplane come out you ear . just -- it be really a dangerous place to fly . so what they do be they split the squadron up from the various group and move the little airplane to satellite strip , which be what they call they -- satellite strip -- and what it would be would be a big field someplace , where they would put down the steel matting if it be necessary . and we would be -- the 16 airplane , the pilot , and the crew would be -- that would be they base , all within 20 , 30 , 40 mile of Frankfort , 60 top . one of the play -- and this be where I meet a german family that become close , and I have see they a couple of time since the war .", "Q : and what be that ? a : window be strip of tin foil . and it -- the strip of tinfoil would look , on the german radar , like a whole big fleet of airplane come . and they be all head for this -- this fake landing site he design . he also design rubber paratrooper of different size , make it look like there be a lot of they .", "a : he be move very fast , and we be terribly important in the fact that he be able to move so fast because a c-47 carry paratrooper into area of drop . then , on the way back , they -- they come back and pick up the glider and they throw it -- fly they in . then they come back and they fly into -- like I take a mission into -- on D-Day plus six , we fly into Omaha Beach , and we fly into a -- a -- a landing strip that have be cut hastily in the bluff above Omaha Beach . and we land there with flight nurse aboard , and pick up the terribly wound -- most terribly wound of Omaha Beach , and we just have a constant stream of airplane fly in and out , and bring those people back to hospital in England . and while I be there , I step out of the airplane , try to help with the loading of the -- of the litter patient and so forth .", "MW : let I just bring up another incident -- another incident , but it be a routine . every Saturday night , the whole block , the whole barrack , have to proceed to so-called -lsb- german -rsb- . everybody have to strip naked , and the -lsb- german -rsb- , so-called -- the charge of the , of the wing , of that , of that barrack -- check for lice -- check -- check at the -- by the genitals , under the armpit , because there be -- there be a lot of lice . every Saturday night be a nightmare for I . I figure , this be the end of I .", "INT : now , you stay at Ravensbr\u00fcck end . would you tell , tell about what happen then ? MW : it be towards the end of April -- well , in ' 45 , I would say it be March ' 45 -- american airplane be fly over we camp and throw down these -- these metal strip and cover the whole camp with metal . so we do not know the -- the meaning of these metal strip . but we know these be Americans .", "would you tell , tell about what happen then ? MW : it be towards the end of April -- well , in ' 45 , I would say it be March ' 45 -- american airplane be fly over we camp and throw down these -- these metal strip and cover the whole camp with metal . so we do not know the -- the meaning of these metal strip . but we know these be Americans . as a matter of fact , I be work at a kommando near ravensbr\u00fcck and from a -- from a high -- higher elevation , I could see Berlin .", "at the same time he would have a fl -- a plane fly and drop what they call window . Q : and what be that ? a : window be strip of tin foil . and it -- the strip of tinfoil would look , on the german radar , like a whole big fleet of airplane come . and they be all head for this -- this fake landing site he design .", "in those day there be no more tire that have air in they . so we make tire out of old car tire . we cut strip of old car tire . but , of course , this be solid . it be like drive on wood you know .", "but we make we ice skate . Q : you make you own ice skate ? a : we make we own ice skate because all it take be le-leather strap , a piece of wood , and then you go to the local blacksmith and he put a little strip of iron underneath as -- as a runner . and you put the strap -- nail the strap to the piece of wood , and you put it on you foot . it work .", "I come across it . the name be Boga . and he -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- have a contraption in he office , the so-called Boga swing , where he strip prisoner , put they -- hang they up like a airplane , and with stick -- maybe on the body and often on the genitals -- hit they to make they fly . and the invitation give out for the nearby officer and lady , so-called lady , ss woman to come in and look at the performance . anyway , one such person speak to he .", "check you ear , put down over there , everything 's -- no hiding -lsb- laugh -rsb- place . so they put I in the -- in a -- in a place like this . you stay just dark and stay naked . they take you out , and somebody check you . put in a finger here , put a finger here , put a finger in the back , in the ass ."], "topic_words": [40, "0.211*\"strip\" + 0.150*\"german\" + 0.063*\"check\" + 0.054*\"big\" + 0.026*\"fly\" + 0.024*\"metal\" + 0.024*\"inch\" + 0.019*\"absolutely\" + 0.018*\"finger\" + 0.017*\"rubber\""]}, {"texts": ["and he make a cavity at the bottom of the door with a strip of wood that be on two screw . the door be take off the hinge . in that cavity , my mother be hide all the jewelry with the two strip . so whenever we need a piece of jewelry , we have to take the door off the hinge , take the strip of wood , and take a piece of jewelry , and put the door back on the hinge . so most of the valuable be hide there , so they hardly find anything .", "the door be take off the hinge . in that cavity , my mother be hide all the jewelry with the two strip . so whenever we need a piece of jewelry , we have to take the door off the hinge , take the strip of wood , and take a piece of jewelry , and put the door back on the hinge . so most of the valuable be hide there , so they hardly find anything . but it be a frightful experience , the way they behave , the way they -- they turn everything around in the house , the way they be take out drawer and throw everything on the floor .", "and I enter the door , and I look . inside the room -- as I say a small room -- the Germans have erect some kind of a board upright , much like a sheet of plywood . and here , they have take a prisoner and they have strip he ; and they have nail he with spike -- common spike with the head on they -- through he elbow and through he wrist that I see . nail he like this , spread-eagled on that board . and I could see where they have take apparently a scalpel , and they have cut he throat on the side here ... he vocal cord somewhere .", "it really ... it be a piece of wood ... a strip of wood ... you know , like this ... Q : yes . a : Yah , and it be a strip of wood , so you could not see it , and you could open this up , and they be sleep in that . they have the mattress in it and they be sleep during the night . Q : in other word , you be able to open that panel , and there be a mattress behind it , and that be where they sleep during the night .", "Q : with the board ... a : Yah , with the board . it really ... it be a piece of wood ... a strip of wood ... you know , like this ... Q : yes . a : Yah , and it be a strip of wood , so you could not see it , and you could open this up , and they be sleep in that .", "they apparently have be cart from Warsaw or someplace in these boxcar , and the flatcar , of course , be stack with human body . the boxcar be open and when the door open , the one that be dead next to the door fall out on the ground . as I walk past , and I could see inside the boxcar , just nothing but naked human body . as to the gas chamber , this be a very , very , clever system they have in which they would herd the one that be alive and this be they basic system of extermination . they would bring they into this place and there be the crematorium -- and I think it be even next door or adjoining -- and hand these prisoner a towel and a bar of soap and tell they to walk in that room which the sign say `` Showers '' .", "the door be about , I would say , probably 2 inch thick . and we know a carpenter , whom we call . and he make a cavity at the bottom of the door with a strip of wood that be on two screw . the door be take off the hinge . in that cavity , my mother be hide all the jewelry with the two strip .", "I mean he be just a bad person . anyway , there be a bunch of Russians who hate he , because he especially hate Russians , I do not know why , because he be a spanish communist and the Russians be russian Communists , but he hate they . so they nail he -- they strip he , they nail he to the barrack by hand and foot and they take a heavy machine gun and they shoot he to piece . and I watch -- when I be in the hospital I watch out of my window -- be -- my bunk be next to the window , I watch it . and I ask , `` who that be ? ''", "just load with human body . most of they Jews , at this particular point in time . and all naked . they apparently have be cart from Warsaw or someplace in these boxcar , and the flatcar , of course , be stack with human body . the boxcar be open and when the door open , the one that be dead next to the door fall out on the ground .", "a big picture window face the platform of the rail station , otwock . I wake up to the tune of a whistle and machine gun firing . as I look out the window , I see on the platform there be spotlight shine to a bunch of man , and woman , child naked . and as soon as the whistle blow , the machine gun gun they down and the people would fall on top of each other . in back of I in the station , polish black marketeer look out the window like watch a tv movie .", "and after , you know , they finish , a old man , the shamash , be take down the Torah , and there be four step . and he stumble , fall , and the Torah fall out of he hand . and not only that , but the cover of the Torah , the cloth , be pull off , and the Torah , naked , lay there on the floor . and that be a terrible tragedy . the -- -- community , they divide 40 people .", "sometimes the -- what standing at the gate , he use -- he realize that I have some wood , something hide . he do not pay any attention . some -- one of they -lsb- inaudible -rsb- , and he open that piece of rag , see the piece of wood tie to my naked body . he use to tear it off together with my skin . this be the life in Bershad .", "and she fall down . in mid September , she have only a little smock on . she be naked underneath . and as she fall , the whole smock fall away . and there she be naked .", "then on the platform , which on the right and a platform on the left which separate we from the other section of the train , there be big floodlight and there be guard that be stand on both side . be just maybe two or three guard . all of a sudden you hear the sound of a rolling door open and a man , strip down to he trunk , run out of this heat . he just run and the Germans , the german guard , they begin to hunt he like a rabbit . he say , Ich _______ , I have he !", "so the floor collapse . so this man Stanley , he fall down from the second floor , all the way down to the basement . without clothes , naked and everything . he wake up because of the fire . he get burn ."], "topic_words": [41, "0.099*\"open\" + 0.096*\"door\" + 0.059*\"fall\" + 0.056*\"wood\" + 0.046*\"window\" + 0.042*\"close\" + 0.042*\"find\" + 0.034*\"hide\" + 0.032*\"piece\" + 0.031*\"gate\""]}, {"texts": ["what we have see now slowly dawn on we , we be see murder in front of we eye and so that be the very first beginning , and then we be send to have we number tattoo . we be not call by name anymore we be only call by number . we hair be shave off completely and we be assign one thin striped suit and we be assign to certain block , mean that be where we belong and that be the early beginning , and then naturally when you be strip of all you dignity by realize you be non more name , there be only a number , by have you hair shave off and by be force to run naked around by not have the most natural rights in any manner , you notice right away that this be something out of the extraordinary . naturally you be confront with a situation which I suppose create a period in we life which at that time which at that time of complete despair or complete inability to cope with you own survival , and that be why during the very early period , I remember distinctly , many people in my block walk into a loaded wire because they psychologically could not cope with that first period that you be not a human being , that you be worse than a animal . they just could not cope with it and they be run every day i remember notice people hang on these laded wire , who just could not take it , and that be the very early part , the first few day of we be there .", "naturally you be confront with a situation which I suppose create a period in we life which at that time which at that time of complete despair or complete inability to cope with you own survival , and that be why during the very early period , I remember distinctly , many people in my block walk into a loaded wire because they psychologically could not cope with that first period that you be not a human being , that you be worse than a animal . they just could not cope with it and they be run every day i remember notice people hang on these laded wire , who just could not take it , and that be the very early part , the first few day of we be there . Q : when you first start see this , as you say , the murder , the strip of one dignity , how be you able little by little to cope ? a : good question . I have ask myself this many , many time .", "but there they have set up a whole -- a arrangement for disinfect and clean people up and so on . and then the other side of this place there be clean ambulance which be go from the -- from this place to the new -- to the new establishment . so that there be a kind of a insulation between the disease and the lice and everything that the people , that the camp inmate have , that be all wash off and disinfect and strip of they clothing and wrap in a clean blanket . and then the other end of the -- the other side of the building , they would be load into another ambulance which take they to the -- to this new establishment . so you have one series of ambulance go between the camp of what they call the human laundry and another series of ambulance go from the laundry to the new camp .", "we give they the best medical treatment we possibly could , we have call in hospital unit there and they get the best that could be get . let I tell you a little bit how , let I expand upon what happen to the people after they be separate into these unit . the old and inform , people they could not use for anything be tell to undress that they clothes would be send some place to a delousing station . they undress , they be give a bar of soap and a towel . they be then take into a large building , clean as it could possibly be , I should not say as clean as it possibly could be , it be clean , it be very clean .", "let I tell you a little bit how , let I expand upon what happen to the people after they be separate into these unit . the old and inform , people they could not use for anything be tell to undress that they clothes would be send some place to a delousing station . they undress , they be give a bar of soap and a towel . they be then take into a large building , clean as it could possibly be , I should not say as clean as it possibly could be , it be clean , it be very clean . it have a large sign over it : Baden which mean shower bath .", "I know from Hungary be the most in 1944 . they do not have the faintest idea , even the people who come in . so we undress they . and from we place they have to go in where they clean they . they clean they , they shave they , they clean they .", "a : no , first of all , I do not remember we arrival . I just know that we go then into a building . we go through a line where this young lady be I tell you about who be suppose to help I and I talk to she and they take all we belongings away and then we go on and we come into a room where we have to undress and where we get Lager clothes . and , and then we be again assemble and then we go out and go to this block to , no , in the beginning we all go to the block that be the receive block where everyone of we have to go . in we group that arrive there be french nun , polish youngster from , the ss have close up or empty the whole , the Lyzeum .", "t : delousing . b : delousing . so the train would arrive and the patient would be take out from the train , take off , strip from the clothes , shave they hair and they clothes be disinfect , and the train be disinfect . there be two team work . there be the jewish team work on the dirty side and there be a lithuanian team work on the clean side .", "then they load we up again on a train and send we to South Carolina , Fort Jackson . they -- I be home on furlough when the order come , do not come back to Florida , go to Fort Jackson , South Carolina . so I go there and we stay there a month for more , what they call strip down and preparation . then they ship we up to New Jersey , Fort can -- Camp Kilmer , near New Brunswick . there we have to stay two week to get we shot and we overseas equipment and all that stuff .", "now we be arrive to Auschwitz . c3 be the block . for what reason or what be it -- I do not know what kind of punishment must have be in that camp , they put we -- the three -- the 500 girl naked with that one dress , a rainy day . and schotter what be schotter ? Pebbles .", "they tell we they be take we to brick lay training . we do not know if it be true but anything have to be better than the hell we be live in , or at least we figure it could not be worse . they disinfect we and take all we clothes and make we run from block 1 to 17 naked . Block 17 be a clean place . we could take shower , but the head of the block be Alfred Auschowski -lrb- p -rrb- who be a german criminal who kill he family .", "one day a week , usually every Friday , we use to go to the shower to be clean and to have we -- we cl-clothing be disinfect . we go to the shower , we take we clothing , man and woman together in the same place , naked . we have about five minute of shower , and 75 minute naked wait for we -- we -- we clothing to come back from the -- I do not know how they use to call , the place where they disinfect they , and then take he back to the camp . Q : and besides friday , what else do you remember about the daily routine ? a : what I remember , twice a day we use to have what they call the appel , or the appelle .", "and then by such miracle that would take I a while to explain , somebody happen to know we from another city , who happen to vacation in another city . she be -lsb- inaudible -rsb- . see my sister , and she yell over to I , in a place where you see thousand of girl naked , we go to the bathhouse . she call over to I and she say , Eva , I see you sister . and then I know that where my sister be in what camp , I beg the block leader to let I go over there .", "a : yeah , we be go to - I do not - in Birkenau , in another section , where they have a place where most likely they be take the inmate - I call they inmate - regularly , once a week or once every ten day , whatever time , you know , and we be go to those thing to have shower . so , I do not know how often I do that , I do not remember , but I think once a week or once every ten day . when we arrive there , we undress , they take we clothes , they put it through the same function , like they give we - okay , what they have to do to put this stuff to disinfect all the dress . so , they give we - they take another bunch that they already disinfect from another group , and they give it to we , and we have a new dress , but each time it be a new old dress . each time , I have to fight to get the longest , but I be very lucky .", "they use to call it -lsb- non-english -rsb- . that be the name they give , -lsb- non-english -rsb- , that nobody 's allow to go out . and the german use to go block to block and tell the woman to undressed -- I be , myself , in it -- to undress naked . and one by one , they use to pass through they naked , of course . and they be look at you if you have not get any disease or anything like that ."], "topic_words": [42, "0.141*\"call\" + 0.127*\"happen\" + 0.079*\"block\" + 0.069*\"arrive\" + 0.060*\"clean\" + 0.046*\"day\" + 0.036*\"disinfect\" + 0.028*\"suppose\" + 0.026*\"notice\" + 0.017*\"assign\""]}, {"texts": ["you should not pack . you should offer passive -- you can not offer active resistance , but at least you should offer passive resistance . so what the -- what the majority of people do , they do not dress and they -- they stay naked . they stay naked . they do not pack anything .", "you should offer passive -- you can not offer active resistance , but at least you should offer passive resistance . so what the -- what the majority of people do , they do not dress and they -- they stay naked . they stay naked . they do not pack anything . and so the British make a announcement say , next day , everybody have to be pack .", "Q : Sulfur , like sulfur . a : yeah . so they give we a bath there and they give we again dress , again big -- I do not know , one 's get a dress til here , naked the bottom . I get a dress til -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- . they give I a pair of shoe , I be suffer still to-today .", "so the -- -lsb- pause for 7 seconds -rsb- the people who be in charge of the transport decide that we be not go to leave without a fight . and so they decide that we offer passive resistance . and we be all instruct not to dress , stay naked , not to pack . and when the police come in the morning , they might be embarrass to see we , especially the woman . and maybe we can accomplish stay in Palestine that way .", "we have malaria , we suffer terrible from malaria . I remember the first time I see my mother naked in a bath . we be to bath together and my mother be a nice , plump , geshmacke actress , you know ... and I come to the bath with my mother and I see she naked and I start cry , and I run away from the bath , because I could not ... like the same look like you have on the people when you see from the extermination camp . because some people do not think that be in the war in Russia , in a labor camp , or live there be , besides the killing , like it be with this , that it be different for a jew . my mother look the same way .", "all these place I walk with my finger and remember ... and still I survive with my mother . we have malaria , we suffer terrible from malaria . I remember the first time I see my mother naked in a bath . we be to bath together and my mother be a nice , plump , geshmacke actress , you know ... and I come to the bath with my mother and I see she naked and I start cry , and I run away from the bath , because I could not ... like the same look like you have on the people when you see from the extermination camp . because some people do not think that be in the war in Russia , in a labor camp , or live there be , besides the killing , like it be with this , that it be different for a jew .", "Q : and what about underwear ? panties ? a : those who have strip clothese , there be -- there be under -- underpants , not very -- very sexy one , but there be underpants , and some kind of a undershirt , and the other , the jewish prisoner , who wear dress , or whatever , they -- they be allow to -- to wear a -- sweater , under the dress . Q : under the dress ? not over the dress ?", "cs : and there be little room like it look like horse be stand there . and they start say , take off the -- the dress , take of the -- first the shoe with the stocking , then the dress , then the bra , then the pants until we come on the other side be stay german laugh . maybe you see it in Majdanek , people , every one of we walk out this way because we be naked . and they give we to drink a sweet coffee . it be so sweet probably I do not see it while the war be on .", "I be alone . my sister , my brother-in-law , and my niece go to Auschwitz a day before I go , and then after the selection , we be take to out bath . we be undress on this side , take a bath , and go out the other side . on the other side there stand a table with some dress , and a dress be throw to you . I have a black dress , a long black dress .", "Change of tape SUBJECT : we -- we stay together , the group of 200 of we who have be select from the -- from that transport , and we be all young , healthy people . I mean , we have be select once over again when we be in the bath house , we have be select naked . you know , that be true . and again , they want to send my mother off , and they -- and then they ask she whether she have somebody there , and she say she have a daughter .", "of course , I be skinny but -- we stay there naked and near the clothes , we still have private clothes . only mark it down with red , red mark , political prisoner , understand ? we put the suit on the side and we stay naked . so they select somebody likes . so I see from 50 or 60 , they pull out one and go one side .", "Q : right , right . a : -- or bath or anything like that . but -- but when I undress , sure , at night , dressi -- undress and dress , always -- because that be there , it be there , I -- I know , I be aware of it , and -- and there be no doubt about it , that -- Q : and nobody question you that you be do some -- you be dress and undress in a way -- a : not at all , no --", "and another prison have a bucket of yellow paint and a brush about four inch wide and paint a yellow streak from the top of we shave head down to we back . this be the identification of be a jewish prisoner and that be how we enter the campsite . INT : and down you naked back or on the dress ? RF : on the dress , through the dress . I remember the dress stick to my body .", "a : -- or bath or anything like that . but -- but when I undress , sure , at night , dressi -- undress and dress , always -- because that be there , it be there , I -- I know , I be aware of it , and -- and there be no doubt about it , that -- Q : and nobody question you that you be do some -- you be dress and undress in a way -- a : not at all , no -- Q : No .", "there be another young girl she have a groin abscess which be drain for week and month . I mean the woman with the leg , I remember once I want to wash my famous dress , I mean we have nothing . so , if you want to wash a dress you borrow something from a patient and wear that for a day and wash the dress and the patient be lie naked . condition be pretty horrid , but as I say , they be still feed we . we get the bread in the morning , and we , the personnel do not have to stay and it be get cold ."], "topic_words": [43, "0.230*\"naked\" + 0.182*\"dress\" + 0.125*\"stay\" + 0.089*\"bath\" + 0.053*\"select\" + 0.035*\"stick\" + 0.016*\"bathroom\" + 0.012*\"direction\" + 0.011*\"occasion\" + 0.011*\"mark\""]}, {"texts": ["in the beginning , we have very small ration to eat , about 600 or 800 calorie per person . after the hunger become a little bit -- get a little bit worse , people with strip the tree from the leaf and eat the leaf . and whenever a stray animal come in , it be also strip . the hospital have a little bit better food , because people would die every day , 10 or 15 , of typhus , and they be take away , together these people alive . and one day , they take all the remain people , include my parent , to a train , and nobody come back .", "a : railroad track also . Q : be this kind of activity go on throughout you whole time there ? a : no , it be air strip and railroad track , air strip , railroad track , what else be there , that be practically it . Q : now , be this earlier on ? a : no , that be that be already -- I think it be the last , the last that be the beginning of ' 45 , because I remember the air raid be come , and that be we only relief , because it be near the wood where we build this air strip , and when the Allies be coming , we be order to run into the wood to hide .", "but it be -- there be tree . in the beginning , we have very small ration to eat , about 600 or 800 calorie per person . after the hunger become a little bit -- get a little bit worse , people with strip the tree from the leaf and eat the leaf . and whenever a stray animal come in , it be also strip . the hospital have a little bit better food , because people would die every day , 10 or 15 , of typhus , and they be take away , together these people alive .", "and the order be that the battalion commander have to come ashore as rapidly as possible in order to get control of they unit . a amphibious operation be a very difficult operation because you be land on hostile shore . the enemy -- you be face a enemy that be already dig in , and you be relatively naked because you be get out of small boat and rush at they . so the senior commander have to get ashore rapidly in order to get control of the unit and determine how you be go to assault the german position . so yes , I be -- all the battalion commander come ashore at 10 minute after each hour .", "and two american pilot be dead in concentration -- we concentration camp . besides this , be also kill in -- really hang , two very famous german officer . one be General Canares , very famous person in Germany , and because be against the Hitler , be two day before we liberation , two , three day before we liberation , be strip from the clothes and hang naked in concentration camp . that be be General Canares . also second very famous man be the leader of the sh -- leader , church leader from the Ausberg , I think so .", "a : no , it be air strip and railroad track , air strip , railroad track , what else be there , that be practically it . Q : now , be this earlier on ? a : no , that be that be already -- I think it be the last , the last that be the beginning of ' 45 , because I remember the air raid be come , and that be we only relief , because it be near the wood where we build this air strip , and when the Allies be coming , we be order to run into the wood to hide . when we run into the wood we use to grab the leaf , dry leaf from the tree , and we have the paper from the cement paper , and roll they up and we smoke just to relieve the hunger . and the plane be come so low , you hold on to , and they be british , they be the Royal Air Force we could see .", "that be be General Canares . also second very famous man be the leader of the sh -- leader , church leader from the Ausberg , I think so . this be Protestant , Protestant leader , and be also against the Hitler and be hang naked on the -- in the -- in this camp . that be be many other , and after the American , I not mention this , ne -- we be very please see the American , and American be so special , american young people , boy , be cry see the situation like we live in , we -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- , we hospital . and ask we people if -- I mean , the people who be go int -- in camp , if you have something and you suppose to do right or kill fellow who do something wrong for you , you can have the rifle , you can kill .", ". of Tabak , cigarette Tabak -lsb- nb : tobacco -rsb- what I find in the Kanada . and on the way back , they let we ... undress we , naked , and they find the cigarette . and for that I get a two month ... two month in the Straf company -lsb- nb : strafkommando = `` punishment brigade '' -rsb- . the Straf company be the ... everybody know what a straf company ... company be .", "he could not -- I could not si -- you know . I cry when he -- when the steak come on my plate , I say , oh this be a ration for a whole family for a month , I can not eat that . and then in the evening he take I to Folies Berg\u00e8re where I see for the first time a naked woman , which you know , in -- in those day , you know , ma -- ma -- that be very puritanical . and then I come to England and I go to school in England , get my English fix up , and I be in England from February 1948 until early in October 1948 when a Liberty ship w-was return empty from Plymouth to New York . and I get , for 83.50 , a fare on a empty -- in the hold of a Liberty ship .", "but I be ask she question , and I forget how the sequel go , because I do not attach that much importance to it , but I do notice that she have a good stack of american cigaret -- cigarette brand -- american brand cigarette , loosely , not in a pack , but i-in a tray on she table in -- in the prison . and in the course of question , she -- I ask she where she get those cigarette and she have no hesitancy at all in answering by just open she robe . and I find out she be ab -- absolutely stark naked underneath the robe . which be unusual prison garb also . and then I put two and two together and I say , `` let I see if I have this figure right .", "when we be hide , there be no cigarette . but a man grow tobacco leaf . we be strip the leaf of the tobacco . so what he give to my father be the stem , the bare stem . my father chop it up and smoke that .", "what be the circumstance ? answer : well , from England to Paris , uh I be uh fly over in a small plane together with a number of other officer , and we land on a air strip in Normandy . the uh german troops and uh I tell you be not that far away , and indeed as we plane land on the air strip in Normandy uh Ger ... german artillery begin shell the air strip . we be ask to uh leave the plane as quickly as possible and to run for cover , and uh of course I follow order very quickly . and uh in the process I lose a brand new officer 's trench coat that I have just purchase in London before departure for France .", "and I say , I be in the hospital . the Germans bombard the hospital . I jump from the hospital naked and merciful german give I something to wear . thank God I make the story up , and here I be , and have the honor today to honor the -lsb- ? kiddushim , ? -rsb-", "JOE KAHOE Page 2 who have be release and we warn , particularly about feed they . to be careful when they come on out . so as we proceed down the road and this happen and this happen for day and day eh we would see they come with those strip uniform . they be all eh real skinny , emaciated , and the fact they be starve , so we be they be warn not give they anything to eat , because all we have be those K ration . they be highly concentrated and if they eat those thing they it it might kill they .", "he say , it seem that Lord Jollit -lrb- ph -rrb- , who be the chancellor of -- lord chancellor of England and keeper of the privy seal be here in Berlin , and he have express a desire to go down to Nuremberg and see the top nazi prisoner that you have down there . he say , now it so happen that he be travel in the plane that President Roosevelt give to Churchill , you know , the -- in the last election , the government change . so then he plane be at the british air strip in the british zone here in Berlin and if you report over there at 10 o'clock and take he -lsb- indecipherable -rsb- and take he down to Nuremberg and let he see the prisoner and entertain he on behalf of the -- the american army , I will greatly appreciate it . which of course that be just he very gentle , nice way of give I a order . and then he -- oh he -- first he ask I if I care to -- to smoke , a cigarette or a pipe or a cigar ."], "topic_words": [44, "0.085*\"day\" + 0.055*\"order\" + 0.045*\"month\" + 0.042*\"bit\" + 0.037*\"eat\" + 0.036*\"hospital\" + 0.034*\"sick\" + 0.033*\"practically\" + 0.029*\"alive\" + 0.029*\"air\""]}, {"texts": [". and we be ________ for several hour , almost the whole day before the we be receive by Dachau , by the ______ of Dachau . and it finally we have be put in we eh eh eh accept eh eh eh and in we eh eh and signed-up or and give the number and take to shower and after that I be completely naked . everything have be take from I , all of my belongings that I bring from eh eh __________ elsbrook ???? and eh my uniform , old uniform , inhale ... and they and eh it be not a give anything that be eh that be eh eh use in Dachau .", "what they do , they dehumanize you . what they do they keep you stark naked without any service or without any food . I do not know whether it be twenty-four hour or forty-eight hour ... I can not tell , but at that time we get dehumanize by stand naked without any facility , without any food , wall to wall . I remember that because that be a quite a quite a bad experience . that be just ... prison camp name be Blechhammer .", "of course I get hit . what they do , they dehumanize you . what they do they keep you stark naked without any service or without any food . I do not know whether it be twenty-four hour or forty-eight hour ... I can not tell , but at that time we get dehumanize by stand naked without any facility , without any food , wall to wall . I remember that because that be a quite a quite a bad experience .", "sb : ah hah . bf : she be in the bad , she t - , eh , bad , eh , state . so we put she on the bench and all that I see she , she only be this old , naked woman on this bench . I see she always how she be there , with she daughter , she be . sb : so , but the child who be with you , be they separate ?", "he , she daughter be a real Philips employee , this aunt . she be already almost 70 year . and I remember when we be naked and she be already in a -- bad -- she come through . sb : ah hah . bf : she be in the bad , she t - , eh , bad , eh , state .", "because of a matronly german woman take the woman aside and strip search they . I be one of they . and if anybody have ever be strip search and especially by a angry , german official of the Nazis , strip search a young jewish girl , you can imagine what that be like . not pleasant , not nice and without get graphic very nasty and impersonal . it be one of the most unpleasant experience that I have personally and I think that be all I be go to say about that .", "so then he take away the gun from my nose and he take off the the belly and tell I stand up . and I stand up so that ... take off you clothes . entirely naked I stand and then they could see that I be a jew and then he tell I if you escape from Kovno from the Nazis , what be you do here ? we already liberate Kovno five day . so I say ... I could see that they be very top up top officer of the army , but he look to I like a jew but he do not disclose a word about he jewishness , so he say , why do not you go back to Kovno .", "Q : now , just tell I when you be stand naked in front of all of these Nazis have to parade around , that must have be a very unusual experience . I be wonder if it be more difficult for the girl ? a : I think I be shock because I have never see a naked male , not even my own brother . it be shocking . I just look around myself and see everybody walk ahead so I figure this be what I have to do , try to shield yourself , you know part of you body because it be so embarrassing .", "I do not know at the time what strip search mean . I be a little past 12 year old and I find that out in a big hurry . because of a matronly german woman take the woman aside and strip search they . I be one of they . and if anybody have ever be strip search and especially by a angry , german official of the Nazis , strip search a young jewish girl , you can imagine what that be like .", "the younger people they leave use they for work . those be the people that go away . Q : now , just tell I when you be stand naked in front of all of these Nazis have to parade around , that must have be a very unusual experience . I be wonder if it be more difficult for the girl ? a : I think I be shock because I have never see a naked male , not even my own brother .", "they be put into a big machine or something like that , in a container and which supposedly be heat up so that it should kill these lice but they never be kill . they be only worse every time that when you get you clothes back . and meantime you go -- have to go to a shower bath and the ss -- male and female -- be , we be totally naked . we be stand around . they be stand there talk to one another , laugh they head off that we be all stand there in -- with nothing on helplessly .", "there be nothing leave on we body but skin and bone . I do not think that we could appeal to a man as a female . but just think what it do to we own person , stand there and view each other totally naked , totally helpless , totally powerless , so degraded . what do they do do to we ? it be at time such as these that you sometimes begin feel that you be indeed a untermensch , subhuman .", "what work we should we do in there ? who be suit for , for kind of work ? so , we go through that -- well , we to the hole -- we go to the doctor , they say ... you be naked , you stand at this one -- be naked -- it kind of embarrassed -- and , ah , ah , I faint . I just collapse . there be no food .", "sb : gently . bf : -lsb- chuckle -rsb- it be awful . and then come in the Germans , between all the naked woman . they come to , to look at you . the german officer come to -lsb- chuckle -rsb- -- this be something , and then you get in another room .", "they would stand up when they search they , and they hold that thing in they hand like this . up there . they would search they all over but the thing they be look for -- they be really look for food -- they have a list and if they have jewelry on it , they would have strip they . but they be look , really for food , because people get really inventive . they use to take a salami and put it right in front and close to the jacket , or a loaf of bread ."], "topic_words": [45, "0.256*\"naked\" + 0.072*\"stand\" + 0.064*\"food\" + 0.058*\"search\" + 0.039*\"totally\" + 0.031*\"experience\" + 0.024*\"stark\" + 0.024*\"eh\" + 0.022*\"suddenly\" + 0.022*\"Nazis\""]}, {"texts": ["and he help I to get in in the Technical Department , which be ... Technical Department be a group of about uh a hundred painter , mainly hund ... hundred . it be about engineer , main ... mainly these uh engineer and painter and draftsman . so would ... would be there in a way consider draftsman and painter together ; and uh uh what my job be to uh to uh to prepare everyday statistics ... take statistics take for the Kommandatur to uh ... these be uh ... we have to ... on small strip , we have to write down how many people do receive certain amount of food , how much and so on . uh , statistics also who die , who do not die , how many be live and under what condition and so on . just statistics .", "the truck just take off and they uh they beat she down to the ground , my mother and uh could do nothing and uh I can imagine uh after the war for all these year to have to live with such memory , what it mean to uh to or to my father for that matter , that he could not uh that he could not protect my brother and that the uh guilt feeling , uh he feel that uh he have uh take my brother with he rather than have send he with I uh and that in turn may make he feel guilty if uh if I be able to survive and uh if he have let my older brother go together with I that he maybe he would have survive too . but that be the decision at that time , that uh he though he would be able to jump the train . -lrb- pause -rrb- up to uh up to a certain point yes , uh my parent be able to uh when they still have uh they have money and uh where they connection be able to uh do something for they , but when you reach uh Auschwitz , we be strip uh of we belongings and uh reduce to uh to object that they could do with uh whatever they want . -lrb- pause -rrb- you ask yourself uh how be it possible and uh -lrb- pause -rrb- to this day when I uh after have uh read and try to understand uh that whole episode of human history , how be it possible in the 20th century for a thing like this to happen and uh there be contradictory feeling and uh -lrb- pause -rrb- to try to explain rationally - there be no explanation . to try to say that uh -lrb- pause -rrb- once the people be tell uh that this be the policy of the government and uh therefore the lower echelon would accept it and go and follow through .", "a : beep . Q : of course we , we have some very good and very close friend among we neighbor , and uh , one woman , she name be uh Frau Resher , I remember , she come in , and she ask where the polish flag be . the polish flag , of course , be uh , a strip of white and a strip of red , very long strip , and my mother say , `` why ? '' and she say , it be really very easy to make a german flag out of it , you know , all you have to do be um cut out around um thing of the from the white and then pose it on the , on the red , and then with a ribbon , make the swastika , you know , I , and my mother absolutely turn pale , and the woman say , `` we we better make that flag and fly from the house , you know , obviously she want to protect we because uh , the house which do not fly uh the swastika flag uh be under scrutiny , and uh , they figure that they be you know , anti-german , and they discover that we be jewish so uh , she just take the flag , my mother look for it in all place where she know she could not find it , but finally she do produce it and uh , and she do make , my mother do not , but the neighbor and another one make the flag , and uh , and it be sort of unbelievable to see uh that flag fly from my childhood home . I remember I think of it like a spider , you know the swastika sort of reach out to , to engulf we , and uh , be a horrible thing , something that be suppose to be for we protection be actually terribly ------------- particularly , you know , to a young girl , and it all come so fast , it be all , within a day .", "how do you get from England to Paris ? what be the circumstance ? answer : well , from England to Paris , uh I be uh fly over in a small plane together with a number of other officer , and we land on a air strip in Normandy . the uh german troops and uh I tell you be not that far away , and indeed as we plane land on the air strip in Normandy uh Ger ... german artillery begin shell the air strip . we be ask to uh leave the plane as quickly as possible and to run for cover , and uh of course I follow order very quickly .", "what be the circumstance ? answer : well , from England to Paris , uh I be uh fly over in a small plane together with a number of other officer , and we land on a air strip in Normandy . the uh german troops and uh I tell you be not that far away , and indeed as we plane land on the air strip in Normandy uh Ger ... german artillery begin shell the air strip . we be ask to uh leave the plane as quickly as possible and to run for cover , and uh of course I follow order very quickly . and uh in the process I lose a brand new officer 's trench coat that I have just purchase in London before departure for France .", "un later on many of those thing be hide but uh at that time it it it be alright . the statistics have to be deliver and everyday on the german komandatur ; and uh at the time the the leader of the the german main , the uh the uh how could I say , the main leader of the german be uh be Seidl . but the uh unpleasant thing be deliver all of the of the strip , the statistics to the Kommandatur , to uh ... and ... and what happen one day , uh about seven people be call because uh they either get from outside some cigarette , or they write letter . and those seven people be uh be hang . and uh I have at that time ... in the morning , i. .", "and uh the picture of a selection . have go through that uh once in you lifetime and you will never forget it . uh the uh infamous uh Dr. Mengele , he would stand at the head of the uh column of the procession of uh naked people and uh some way before reach , uh come up in front of Mengele , we see that uh there be left and there be right and uh what he be do be he would uh people would march up in front of he and uh he would look at they and whether they be still able body or not , able to contribute uh toward the work , to the labor in the factory . so uh when my turn come , and somebody be whisper to I uh to the right , and somehow I uh manage to stay in that right lane without be uh motion back to the left lane . that be what uh make the difference of life and death .", "the lower uh floor , and then the upper be all uh have balcony all through the width of the building , and the door be open , the , the gate rather be open , and we march in , and as we march in , I see man in the striped suit uh you know , which we they do not wear in uh plaushow because in Plaushow one still could wear uh they clothes , you know . but , all , everybody be shaven . a group of man stand on the balcony with shaven head , with a so-called Lausen Promenade , which mean uh Lice Promenade , you know uh , uh shave , strip of hair , uh , uh , uh , uh of skin rather , completely shave , and they be wave to we , and , and cry and laugh . first they , they think that we be in a terrible shape because wear those rag first of all in which they never see we before , and before we leave Birkenau , they paint we with paint , like red , yellow , red or in order so that we would not escape during we uh journey . and I see among those man my husband , and of course , uh , my happiness have no uh , uh no limit .", "they come , the hungarian , uh police , just , first of all we be always uh , brutalize because uh they would just come in and uh , uh take out some girl and , and , and make they do all kind of uh of stupid thing , or man , they would tell the man to walk on all four and uh be like horse and they would ride on they in , in order to , to brutalize they , but then come uh the time when , when they just chase everybody out , they tell we the day before that we can pack one small suitcase , and we should be ready to leave the ghetto . when we come to the , it be a um , at one time , a factory for uh , brick , and there they s-start to search we again . the ss be there also , and every woman have to and every girl have to undress naked and we be search internally for valuable . my mother be a really religious person , and all I could think of be how terrible this be for my mother to go through something such , such a terrible ordeal . when we be finish , my mother take the baby from my sister , she , because she be hold the little boy Donny , and , she have a bottle of milk for the child , and the ss grab the bottle of milk and say , let 's see you cow what you have there , and my mother plead please , the , this be , the child need the milk , please do not take the milk from , from my um grandson .", "but I do not know , as I say , whether she be instrumental in have we neighbor murder or she boyfriend of whatever , but I remember my mother tell we not to talk loud and not to say thing so much so because it be none of that woman 's business , and I understand now why . at any rate uh the woman and she boyfriend take a trip to Paris in the year uh 1943 and uh they return on the first evening of Rosh HaShanah at which time live in we house in we flat while she be go be a family of four people ... a man , he wife and the two child , and that be the man whom I have find with my mother the day when my father disappear . that friend , he and he wife and he two child who have be pick up by the Gestapo and whom my mother have help to liberate , somehow spring from they initial confinement and who have no place to go ... one of the thing that happen when the Gestapo take you be that they also come in and strip the house and take all you effect and uh so they have no place to live and they come and stay with we . after all the woman be not there and she boyfriend and I do not think anyone know they be come back and so ... but they ... it be right ... I remember it be Rosh HaShanah evening and the woman and she boyfriend come back and they have be in Paris and they bring we a gift and I remember the gift that my brother get be a little wind-up car that would not fall off the edge of the table when it , you know , they be common now but we would never see anything like that , so anyway uh we go to bed that night . I do not know how my mother must have feel .", "now you have to understand we later realize that we be walk into some kind of a military pocket ... the Russians in the back of we and the Allied army in front of we , and uh in the middle of the night it be ... no , not middle ... it it it be just get dark ... the russian gun really uh send they shell and they come they come closer and closer , and almost threatening and at this moment I say to my friend ... we ... I see some of the polish people , polish political prisoner we have in we area , say well , this enough , we run . and I say to my friend , I think this be also the time for we to run , so we leave the the the fire and we leave the horse meat and we leave whatever ... but just whatever we could grab , especially a blanket or so , and we run towards a road . the ss be still there and when they see we or see we run , they be still shooting after we , but luckily uh we name tag be not on they on they on they bullet , and then all of a sudden uh we reach a area ... meantime it have become dark , where we be we be somehow in no man 's land , but not completely because on that road we have to reach , there we see the the remnant of the german army , also try to make they way to the north , and refugee obviously come from Berlin with all kind of vehicle , fire truck , hearse , milk truck ... whatever move , they have use , and sometimes put together because they do not have enough gasoline anymore , so they have tie ... have tie these together , and we then say well , probably the safest be to mix with these people , and after all , I have throw away the the the the strip coat and I take ... have throw ... not throw away but put it my pocket the the cap , so I I look at least like a civilian , and my friend also whatever they have . we mix with the the population , and uh so they walk rather slowly . there be no march because there be hundred and thousand of people , press towards the north .", "and I see people work on damage plane . uh , there be airplane . and later on , I find out that that be ... Auschwitz be part of where they repair -- plane that be damage during the war be strip , use for spare part . and also I remember see these uh ... they be sort of balloon , so that plane can not fly too low . and I have no idea what purpose they be ; but there be to prevent plane from fly very far .", "uh ... later on , later on I find out ... uh ... that ... uh ... you know , when you begin to question why and that be so we would not have we period . and ... uh ... that be another story beside that . so anyways , this be ... uh ... and then they give we a strip dress and clog , ... uh ... wooden clog . and ... uh ... then they give we a rusty tin can that look like full of rust for we food and they say that be ... we have to hold on because we life depend on that , but if we lose that we would get nothing . and ... uh ... then we be assign a barrack , and there be no room .", "you could not undress . there be week we would not undress because in the middle of the night you would have to run several time . uh it become such that you could not dare uh undress yourself to even wash yourself in the basin in you room because they would come to bomb . uh one day a high italian official come to the city and my mother , not be bashful , approach he in the parade and say it be impossible for we to remain here . I have a little child , and uh could we get permission , because here we be send here by the italian govern force , uh could I get permission to go to the next town , and the next town be call , also small town .", "I certainly do not say that I be a administrator or a law student . I say I be a welder , and he direct I to one group . I have lose track of my wife and my son , but then also what I see and what be completely new to I be all of a sudden woman in ss uniform with with they pistol holster , you know , where they ... the pistol uh dangle , and they also prepare ... behave like animal , and they uh uh uh be especially busy with the woman with child and the elderly and then we see uh and I see people in in a certain uniform I have never see before , with strip clothing and peculiar kind of a of a of a cap , and uh so then truck uh be be drive up and one group of people , especially the woman with child and the elderly be put on one truck and we still have to wait and uh then this truck leave and it so happen that my wife and my my my son have ... they be sit or be stand at the end of that truck , and my wife be somehow wave to I . and that be the last I have see of she . we have to wait and then be be be press into another truck , and though we think it be full already they they uh they still push I do not know how many people into ... it be less ... it be worse than sardine ."], "topic_words": [46, "0.387*\"uh\" + 0.042*\"group\" + 0.028*\"small\" + 0.028*\"leave\" + 0.027*\"um\" + 0.026*\"plane\" + 0.024*\"friend\" + 0.022*\"remember\" + 0.016*\"bomb\" + 0.013*\"strip\""]}, {"texts": ["-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and when we be in the jacuzzi on the balcony in San Salito , above San Francisco , you know , on the other side of the bridge , he say to I and Eve , you must excuse my little girl that they be look at you strangely , because you be actually the first people outside the family who be with we in the jacuzzi . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- we be not even naked . they be -- they always go into the jacuzzi naked . but this time , we all have swim trunk . so , he -- so I say , jokingly I say , well , Karel , what be the -lsb- speak czech -rsb- ?", "and we all go into he jacuzzi . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and when we be in the jacuzzi on the balcony in San Salito , above San Francisco , you know , on the other side of the bridge , he say to I and Eve , you must excuse my little girl that they be look at you strangely , because you be actually the first people outside the family who be with we in the jacuzzi . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- we be not even naked . they be -- they always go into the jacuzzi naked . but this time , we all have swim trunk .", "-lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- and the rest be history for everybody . they take away those little suitcase what we have from we . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and they put we in -- in a room , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- naked . and they cut we hair . and -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- just woman .", "` ja . ' ? -rsb- on the railway track , there be freeze , naked body -- but skeleton , of course . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- he start -- the head Gestapo start laugh like a horse . ` ha ha , ha ha , ha ha ! '", "with my whole image , with my body , and with my mind , I be there . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and then when I be tell you , it be like it be real . I be 16 year old , naked in the haystack . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- I be not expose to nature . I be a city boy , when suddenly in one week , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- all I that I go through , lose everybody , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- get -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- humiliate .", "and the testimony that they scream in pain as part of they body freeze . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and then the rewarming of those who do not die be most effective by very hot bath . and then Heinrich Himmler , who be the chief of the Gestapo , a major nazi leader who commit suicide after he be capture by the British , order rewarming by naked woman . and I guess this be , maybe , one of the first truly shocking bit of testimony that I certainly hear . and at one point , four gypsy prostitute , themselves prisoner , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- be produce from Ravensbruck concentration camp to Dachau .", "and then I say , that be , that be impossible . and then we go to Auschwitz where they tell we to strip naked , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- -lsb- sigh -rsb- leave the clothes where you be and move over . we be completely naked . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and while we be stand , the Nazis come . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- -lsb- background noise -rsb- and there be some attractive , young , good-looking girl .", "meanwhile , the second line , undressed and be chase . and so on , and so on . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- -lsb- sigh -rsb- we undress . -lsb- pause for 6 seconds -rsb- on my left side , like I tell you , be my rabbi of the Talmud , rabbi -lsb- non-english -rsb- . somehow he get faster undressed than I be , or my father , who be in the first line .", "they open they up if there be nothing hide in the braid , you know , gold or , or diamond . -lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- so they open up my hair . and we be stand naked -- completely , just , you know -- -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- and they tattoo we arm . and this be my name for the last , next two year , 56065 . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- we be tattoo accord to ABC , so I be Butnick .", "and I guess this be , maybe , one of the first truly shocking bit of testimony that I certainly hear . and at one point , four gypsy prostitute , themselves prisoner , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- be produce from Ravensbruck concentration camp to Dachau . and the chilled-to-unconsciousness male -- male , naked victim be place between the two naked woman , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- just indicate how obscene all of this be . and I have , in my file in the other room , which I have not pull for this purpose , a copy of that exhibit that be also offer and admit into evidence . captured german document .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- it be still in -- it be still in the middle of the night . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- they be bring we in to a big building . and they be tell we all to undress . and the only thing that we can take with we be we shoe and go to the next -- to another room in the building where they shave everybody 's head . and we be be put in a room -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- where when we walk into that room , we see the woman that make it to that point .", "-lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- take a rest , I breathe for a couple minute . and I figure , I will go back to -lsb- inaudible -rsb- , to the same farmer when I run away , when I put the german in between the building , the way I know . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- I start to go , naked . naked except the cover -- the only cover I get be the blood . INT : be the -- be the blood ?", "would you continue in Auschwitz ? fr : ok . well , -lsb- PAUSES for 5 seconds -rsb- after we undress there , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- we be -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- first of all lead into a area like a -- like a conveyor belt . it be barracks after barracks , just divide with hardly any separation . you go in there .", "or we would come back with underwear -- it be get cold -- and so on . but one day , we group be stop . -lsb- pause for 5 seconds -rsb- and the ss at the door , at the entrance -- and the ss ask three girl , -lsb- point -rsb- like this , you , you , and you come forward and undress . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- of course , they find clothing on they . -lsb- pause for 4 seconds -rsb- so we have to witness the hanging of the three girl .", "-lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- that be it . INT : do you ever find out what happen to you family ? js : well , I do meet a woman who tell I that my mother be in a group of woman , about 200 of they , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- that , either in 1942 -- I be not sure which date -- or the beginning of ' 43 , be march out into the wood by the ukrainian collaborator , -lsb- PAUSES for 4 seconds -rsb- give shovel to dig , -lsb- PAUSES for 3 seconds -rsb- tell to undress , and they be all mow down . there be a mass grave in the outskirts of the city . they have a light , there , burning , a eternal light ."], "topic_words": [47, "0.226*\"seconds\" + 0.205*\"pause\" + 0.157*\"naked\" + 0.058*\"inaudible\" + 0.029*\"PAUSES\" + 0.014*\"point\" + 0.012*\"sigh\" + 0.011*\"size\" + 0.011*\"heap\" + 0.009*\"suitcase\""]}, {"texts": ["so we do not know what happen to we , what will happen . then they say we should , should undress . and then we stand naked , you stand naked , we stand naked . I be so happy it be June , it be not so awful . and then you want to wait , and then to go to stand in a room .", "and they send you to stand there for hour . INT : naked in the snow for hour ? ph : naked in the snow , yes . INT : for hour ? ph : yes , well , it seem like hour .", "so one , with each other , to get warmer , to -- what happen over there be they now be the one they be in the center , the outside , the be -lsb- inaudible -rsb- they be go around in the center . the one who be in the center be come out . I do not know how many hour -- two , three hour , four hour we stay over there , naked , with that snow and that cold . afterward , and they get we out of there , I do not know how many dead body it be right on the ground . they take we from there .", "run for the S.S. ... the S.S. be stand and they be run ... be a selection of woman ... far away , of the same place , but far away . I do not know what happen to they . but we could see the naked woman , and we be stand naked , for hour , and then the sun go away , and ... it get cloudy , you know . the sun hide under the cloud . under the cloud we start to freezing , you know .", "lf : it be important that you talk . GK : in January , it be in the month of January , I think it be 1943 or 1944 , I do not recall exactly , anyhow , they want make entlausung -lsb- delousing -rsb- , general cleaning . so everything we have to take off , naked like we be bear , and we go out , outside , and in Poland January outside be not like here . there be snow at least four or five inch high , and completely naked without shoe , without stocking , the whole block be then stand . who be inside , so they warm up , one to each other , the back to the front .", "and they make sure that you be completely naked after whenever they give you the shot . and they send you to stand there for hour . INT : naked in the snow for hour ? ph : naked in the snow , yes . INT : for hour ?", "it be very cruel . so we do not know what happen to we , what will happen . then they say we should , should undress . and then we stand naked , you stand naked , we stand naked . I be so happy it be June , it be not so awful .", "and they say , everything , completely naked . and the Nazis , and the ss be walk around . so , you know , we -- and just shout , undress , undress . and so , eventually , we do . so we have to stand for hour and hour in row naked , wait to be register .", "GK : in January , it be in the month of January , I think it be 1943 or 1944 , I do not recall exactly , anyhow , they want make entlausung -lsb- delousing -rsb- , general cleaning . so everything we have to take off , naked like we be bear , and we go out , outside , and in Poland January outside be not like here . there be snow at least four or five inch high , and completely naked without shoe , without stocking , the whole block be then stand . who be inside , so they warm up , one to each other , the back to the front . and who be outside , around , so you make a round to stay close to each other , that we should warm up .", "so when we get all undressed they keep we for hour , they have we wait for hour on the street . tape # 2 , side 1 -rrb- -rrb- so when you get there and you have to take all you clothes off , what happen ? and they have we wait for hour and hour on the street naked , and those ss man walk around among we , and then they take we in and they separate we . who separate ? the ss .", "sj : well , it be utterly , utterly unreal . it be like if you see a spooky movie , and , and , and I have the feeling at time that I be just look in , that it be not happen , that it be a nightmare or , or , or , or some movie or -- it be just so utterly , utterly unreal . because the people -- I mean , all the time somebody come into the barracks , and we have to strip naked , and we have to stand for hour naked , and the band be go around play . and when we go to the latrine , the , the guy that be suppose to be murderer -- because we be tell if it be a , a , a red triangle or whatever -- so they be in charge of we . and there we be sit on the latrine with the maggot in , in -- lower -- ugh .", "Whenever we have time , we be stand and kill the lice . but when we come to Buchenwald , we have to take off all we clothes . we stand the whole night outside for the disinfection , naked . in Buchenwald , in January 1945 , in snow , in cold weather , a whole night naked . till they put -- take we in in a room , they put we in Lysol water , shave we , the whole body .", "so , you know , we -- and just shout , undress , undress . and so , eventually , we do . so we have to stand for hour and hour in row naked , wait to be register . and a lot of people that they be thirsty . we want a drink .", "we be stand there all naked and he come in . I mean he could not have wait until we be dress ? I mean we be stark naked , he walk in , all the soldier walk in -- you just be not a human be anymore . okay , I manage to stand in the back but people have to stand in the front too . and he be stand there and hold a speech -- there be a munitions factory there and he say up to now , no jew ever work there because we be not trustworthy .", "ss : Roll call . sorry . and naked , just as you be bear . and stand in the snow or run in the snow for hour upon hour . -lsb- pause for 3 seconds -rsb- and once , I remember a young boy , because they count we a few time a day ."], "topic_words": [48, "0.305*\"naked\" + 0.183*\"stand\" + 0.079*\"hour\" + 0.072*\"wait\" + 0.050*\"happen\" + 0.047*\"snow\" + 0.026*\"till\" + 0.018*\"January\" + 0.015*\"disinfection\" + 0.011*\"happy\""]}, {"texts": ["as long as it be far away , you could still live and think of you student , because he never leave the place where he live , because he live in that place where we bridge be blow up , he would have be trap and he leave that place because he do not want to leave he patient without a doctor . that be the type of man he be . because he do not know when the Germans be coming , and people would say do not stay in this place because you will trap when the bridge be blow up , because they know that Holland would have be that strip of land that would be immediately Germany . you would be trap . but he say , I do not know when that will happen so I can not leave my patient .", "a : excuse I ? Q : the house you be live in be near that ; be that what you be tell I ? a : the house we live in in Landsberg be Lech , all this -- you know , in the Bible , in the Bible be write Abraham 's house be a house for the hungry , for the naked , for the poor . everybody who go in in Abraham 's house , he get a meal and clothing and dress and everything . we house be Abraham 's house .", "sell it to Saks , and everything -- and we have a store on the strip . and where we live be , we live near the strip . it be between the strip and Santa Monica , and at that time the strip be the place . there be the -- the mola -- th-the larue , there be the Mocambo , Ciro , everything be there . and that be the place there , a main shop , and the factory downstairs , and I work there .", "not very much pay , and I -- my mother-in-law get I a job with a designer , Suzy . Suzy with a designer , design sweater , and skirt with feel appliqu\u00e9ds , it be very much in fashion . sell it to Saks , and everything -- and we have a store on the strip . and where we live be , we live near the strip . it be between the strip and Santa Monica , and at that time the strip be the place .", "Suzy with a designer , design sweater , and skirt with feel appliqu\u00e9ds , it be very much in fashion . sell it to Saks , and everything -- and we have a store on the strip . and where we live be , we live near the strip . it be between the strip and Santa Monica , and at that time the strip be the place . there be the -- the mola -- th-the larue , there be the Mocambo , Ciro , everything be there .", "HA : yes , I have very vivid memory of one particular child . this be in the Lemberg in this camp , there be one child when I come to the camp , he name be Ushi , I only remember Ushi . he be a jewish child , he would not let anybody to undress he . only one woman would undress he . Mrs. Somers , she would undress he , because he be apparently leave by he parent stay in some place in Lemberg .", "you know , he do not want to leave Poland , and especially when he find out that the only place he can go when Gomulka come to power , he allow the Jews to leave Poland . but you could only leave for Israel . and at that time , when my parent finally decide to leave in 1956 , they be strip of they citizenship , and allow to migrate to Israel . I be actually the only one in the family who be not strip of they citizenship . because I be still roman Catholic .", "this be in the Lemberg in this camp , there be one child when I come to the camp , he name be Ushi , I only remember Ushi . he be a jewish child , he would not let anybody to undress he . only one woman would undress he . Mrs. Somers , she would undress he , because he be apparently leave by he parent stay in some place in Lemberg . he do not look like a jewish kid .", "nothing will happen . however , I want you to think and realize you can not survive three minute without hope . so for we and later on , and from the beginning , I still say like the Nazis strip we but from everything . the only thing what the Nazis do not succeed , they could not take away from we hope and faith . because of hope and faith , we be go on from day to day .", "the choice be to resist and be kill , to run , to fight , to or to just hope and to do what one be tell and hope that it be true that what they say that we will take a shower . I do that . I leave my clothing and I leave what whatever little possession I have of my own that I carry through all the year of camp , and these possession be a little handkerchief in which I have tie photograph of my brother and my parent , and after that we be really give shower and when the shower be over , make out ... make to go out through another door where we be give new strip uniform and uh and uh wooden shoe and all those thing that we leave behind we have never see again , so I have not have a picture of my parent until I come to the United States where my aunt uh give I a picture of my parent when they be first marry . this uh ... I remember they only vaguely that way , and I have no picture of my brother . we work .", "but you could only leave for Israel . and at that time , when my parent finally decide to leave in 1956 , they be strip of they citizenship , and allow to migrate to Israel . I be actually the only one in the family who be not strip of they citizenship . because I be still roman Catholic . so you can imagine the hypocrisy of -- of the communist world .", "and so , more or less I figure out that I will go this way and there be a house that I know this house , and this peasant be friendly . I say , `` if we would be lucky , and if I would hit this house , we would be save . '' now imagine if peasant will see we in the middle of the winter , two people naked without shoe . well , anyway , we start to go down , so I have my two revolver . I have everything on I .", "INT : to clean up . jh : -- to clean up and process . and so after this deportation , they take the people that they leave over in this two block area , and under the direction of the Germans , they go house by house , block by block , street by street , and they strip everything that be leave over , and take everything that be worthwhile , pack it , and ship it to Germany . and that be the main reason why they leave the 3,000 people , to do cleanup work . INT : and then , where be the 3,000 cleanup worker send ?", "or shall I sell it and we will find a completely new home . oh no , I say , I have always want to live here . so we virtually strip the house and rebuild the inside . and it be -- INT : again , and when do -- what be the date that you get marry ?", "and so , more or less I figure out that I will go this way and there be a house that I know this house , and this peasant be friendly . I say , `` if we would be lucky , and if I would hit this house , we would be save . '' now imagine if peasant will see we in the middle of the winter , two people naked without shoe . well , anyway , we start to go down , so I have my two revolver . I have everything on I ."], "topic_words": [49, "0.138*\"leave\" + 0.135*\"place\" + 0.083*\"live\" + 0.082*\"house\" + 0.042*\"strip\" + 0.042*\"street\" + 0.036*\"family\" + 0.022*\"survive\" + 0.021*\"parent\" + 0.018*\"main\""]}]